The Project Gutenberg EBook of Uncanny Tales, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Uncanny Tales

Author: Various

Editor: C. Arthur Pearson

Release Date: September 13, 2008 [EBook #26606]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNCANNY TALES ***




Produced by David Clarke, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









       UNCANNY TALES


           LONDON
 C. ARTHUR PEARSON, LIMITED
   HENRIETTA STREET, W.C.
            1916




CONTENTS


                                          PAGE

    I. THE UNKNOWN QUANTITY                  7

   II. THE ARMLESS MAN                      19

  III. THE TOMTOM CLUE                      33

   IV. THE CASE OF SIR ALISTER MOERAN       43

    V. THE KISS                             63

   VI. THE GOTH                             73

  VII. THE LAST ASCENT                      88

 VIII. THE TERROR BY NIGHT                  97

   IX. THE TRAGEDY AT THE "LOUP NOIR"      113




UNCANNY STORIES




I

THE UNKNOWN QUANTITY


Professor William James Maynard was in a singularly happy and contented
mood as he strolled down the High Street after a long and satisfactory
interview with the solicitor to his late cousin, whose sole heir he was.

It was exactly a month by the calendar since he had murdered this
cousin, and everything had gone most satisfactorily since. The fortune
was proving quite as large as he had expected, and not even an inquest
had been held upon the dead man. The coroner had decided that it was not
necessary, and the Professor had agreed with him.

At the funeral the Professor had been the principal mourner, and the
local paper had commented sympathetically on his evident emotion. This
had been quite genuine, for the Professor had been fond of his relative,
who had always been very good to him. But still, when an old man remains
obstinately healthy, when his doctor can say with confidence that he is
good for another twenty years at least, and when he stands between you
and a large fortune which you need, and of which you can make much
better use in the cause of science and the pursuit of knowledge, what
alternative is there? It becomes necessary to take steps. Therefore, the
Professor had taken steps.

Looking back to-day on that day a month ago, and the critical preceding
week, the Professor felt that the steps he had taken had been as
judicious as successful. He had set himself to solve a problem in higher
mathematics. He had found it easier to solve than many he was obliged to
grapple with in the course of his studies.

A policeman saluted as the Professor passed, and he acknowledged it with
the charming old world courtesy that made him so popular a figure in the
town. Across the way was the doctor who had certified the cause of
death. The Professor, passing benevolently on, was glad he had now
enough money to carry out his projects. He would be able to publish at
once his great work on "The Secondary Variation of the Differential
Calculus," that hitherto had languished in manuscript. It would make a
sensation, he thought; there was more than one generally accepted theory
he had challenged or contradicted in it. And he would put in hand at
once his great, his long projected work, "A History of the Higher
Mathematics." It would take twenty years to complete, it would cost
twenty thousand pounds or more, and it would breathe into mathematics
the new, vivid life that Bergson's works have breathed into
metaphysics.

The Professor thought very kindly of the dead cousin, whose money would
provide for this great work. He wished greatly the dead man could know
to what high use his fortune was designed.

Coming towards him he saw the wife of the vicar of his parish. The
Professor was a regular church-goer. The vicar's wife saw him, too, and
beamed. She and her husband were more than a little proud of having so
well known a man in their congregation. She held out her hand and the
Professor was about to take it when she drew it back with a startled
movement.

"Oh, I beg your pardon!" she exclaimed, distressed, as she saw him raise
his eyebrows. "There is blood on it."

Her eyes were fixed on his right hand, which he was still holding out.
In fact, on the palm a small drop of blood showed distinctly against the
firm, pink flesh. Surprised, the Professor took out his handkerchief and
wiped it away. He noticed that the vicar's wife was wearing white kid
gloves.

"Oh, I beg your pardon!" she said again. "It--it startled me somehow. I
thought you must have cut yourself. I hope it's not much?"

"Some scratch, I suppose," he said. "It's nothing."

The vicar's wife, still slightly discomposed, launched out into some
parochial matter she had wished to mention to him. They chatted a few
moments and then parted. The Professor took an opportunity to look at
his hand. He could detect no sign of any cut or abrasion, the skin
seemed whole everywhere. He looked at his handkerchief. There was still
visible on it the stain where he had wiped his hand, and this stain
seemed certainly blood.

"Odd!" he muttered as he put the handkerchief back in his pocket. "Very
odd!"

His thoughts turned again to his projected "A History of the Higher
Mathematics," and he forgot all about the incident till, as it happened
that day month, the first of the month by the calendar, when he was
sitting in his study with an eminent colleague to whom he was explaining
his great scheme.

"If you are able to carry it out," the colleague said slowly, "your book
will mark an epoch in human thought. But the cost will be tremendous."

"I estimate it at twenty thousand pounds," answered the Professor
calmly. "I am fully prepared to spend twice as much. You know I have
recently inherited forty thousand pounds from a relative?"

The eminent colleague nodded and looked very impressed.

"It is magnificent," he said warmly, "magnificent." He added: "You've
cut yourself, do you know?"

"Cut myself?" the Professor echoed, surprised.

"Yes," answered the eminent colleague, "there is blood upon your
hand--your right hand."

In fact a spot of blood, slightly larger than that which had appeared
before, showed plainly upon the Professor's right hand. He wiped it away
with his handkerchief, and went on talking eagerly, for he was deeply
interested. He did not think of the matter again till just as he was
getting into bed, when he noticed a red stain upon his handkerchief. He
frowned and examined his hand carefully. There was no sign of any wound
or cut from which the blood could have come, and he frowned again.

"Very odd!" he muttered.

A calendar hanging on the wall reminded him that it was the first of the
month.

The days passed, the incident faded from his memory, and four weeks
later he came down one morning to breakfast in an unusually good temper.
There was a certain theory he had worked on the night before he meant to
write to a friend about. It seemed to him his demonstration had been
really brilliant, and then, also, he was already planning out with great
success the details of the scheme for his great work.

He was making an excellent breakfast, for his appetite was always good,
and, needing some more cream, he rang the bell. The maid appeared, he
showed her the empty jug, and as she took it she dropped it with a
sudden cry, smashing it to pieces on the floor. Very pale, she stammered
out:

"Beg pardon, sir, your hand--there is blood upon your hand."

In fact, on the Professor's right hand there showed a drop of blood,
perceptibly larger this time than before. The Professor stared at it
stupidly. He was sure it had not been there a moment before, and he
noticed by the heading of the newspaper at the side of his plate that
this was the first of the month.

With a hasty movement of his napkin he wiped the drop of blood away. The
maid, still apologising, began to pick up the pieces of the jug she had
broken; but the Professor had no further appetite for his breakfast. He
silenced her with a gesture, and, leaving a piece of toast half-eaten on
his plate, he got up and went into his study.

All this was trivial, absurd even. Yet somehow it disturbed him. He got
out a magnifying glass and examined his hand under it. There was nothing
to account for the presence of the drop of blood he and the maid had
seen. It occurred to him that he might have cut himself in shaving; but
when he looked in the mirror he could find no trace of even the
slightest wound.

He decided that, though he had not been aware of it, his nerves must be
a little out of order. That was disconcerting. He had not taken his
nerves into consideration for the simple reason that he had never known
that he possessed any. He made up his mind to treat himself to a holiday
in Switzerland. One or two difficult ascents might brace him up a bit.

Three days later he was in Switzerland, and a few days later again he
was on the summit of a minor but still difficult peak. It had been an
exhilarating climb, and he had enjoyed it. He said something laughingly
to the head guide to the effect that climbing was good sport and a fine
test for the nerves. The head guide agreed, and added politely that if
the nerves of monsieur the Professor had shown signs of failing on the
lower glacier, for example, they might all have been in difficulties.
The Professor thrilled with pleasure at the head guide's implied praise.
He was glad to know on such good authority that his nerves were all
right, and the incidents that had driven him there began to fade in his
memory.

Nevertheless, he found himself watching the calendar with a certain
interest, and when he woke on the morning of the first day of the next
month he glanced quickly at his right hand. There was nothing there.

He dressed and spent, as he had planned, a quiet day, busy with his
correspondence. His spirits rose as the day passed. He was still
watchful, but more confident; and, after dinner, though he had meant to
go straight to his room, he agreed to join in a suggested game of
bridge. They were cutting for partners when one of the ladies who was to
take part in the game dropped with a little cry the card she had just
lifted.

"Oh, there is blood upon your hand," she cried, "on your right hand,
Professor!"

Upon the Professor's right hand there showed now a drop of blood, larger
still then those other three had been. Yet the very moment before it had
not been there. The Professor put down his cards without a word, and
left the room, going straight upstairs.

The drop of blood was still standing on his hand. He soaked it up
carefully with some cotton-wool he had, and was not surprised to find
beneath no sign or trace of any cut or wound. The cotton-wool he made up
carefully into a parcel and addressed it to an analytical chemist he
knew, inclosing with it a short note.

He rang the bell, sent the parcel to the post, and then he got out pen
and paper and set himself to solve this problem, as in his life he had
solved so many others.

Only this time it seemed somehow as though the data were insufficient.

Idly his pen traced upon the paper in front of him a large _X_, the sign
of the unknown quantity.

But how, in this case, to find out what was the unknown quantity? His
hand, his firm and steady hand, shook so that he could no longer hold
his pen. He rang the bell again and ordered a stiff whisky-and-soda. He
was a man of almost ascetic habits, but to-night he felt that he needed
some stimulant.

Neither did he sleep very well.

The next day he returned to England. Almost at once he went to see his
friend, the analytical chemist, to whom he had sent the parcel from
Switzerland.

"Mammalian blood," pronounced the chemist, "probably human--rather a
curious thing about it, too."

"What's that?" asked the Professor.

"Why," his friend answered, "I was able to identify the distinctive
bacillus----" He named the rare bacillus of an unusual and obscure
disease. And this disease was that from which the Professor's cousin had
died.

The professor was a man interested in all phenomena. In other
circumstances he would have observed keenly that which now occurred,
when the hair of his head underwent a curious involuntary stiffening and
bristling process that in popular but sufficiently accurate terms, might
be described as "standing on end." But at the moment he was in no state
for scientific observations.

He got out of the house somehow. He said he did not feel well, and his
friend, the chemist, agreed that his holiday in Switzerland did not seem
to have done him much good.

The Professor went straight home and shut himself up in his study. It
was a fine room, ranged all round with books. On the shelves nearest to
his hand stood volumes on mathematics, the theory of mathematics, the
study of mathematics, pure mathematics, applied mathematics. But there
was not any one of these books that told him anything about such a thing
as this. Though, it is true, there were many references in them, here
and there, to _X_, the unknown quantity.

The Professor took his pen and wrote a large _X_ upon the sheet of paper
in front of him.

"An unknown quantity!" he muttered. "An unknown--quantity!"

The days passed peacefully. Nothing was out of the ordinary except that
the Professor developed an odd trick of continually glancing at his
right hand. He washed it a good deal, too. But the first of the month
was not yet.

On the last day of the month he told his housekeeper that he was feeling
a little unwell. She was not surprised, for she had thought him looking
ill for some time past. He told her he would probably spend the next day
in bed for a thorough rest, and she agreed that that would be a very
good idea. When he was in his own room and had undressed, he bandaged
his right hand with care, tying it up carefully and thoroughly with
three or four of his large linen handkerchiefs.

"Whatever comes, shall now show," he said to himself.

He stayed in bed accordingly the next day. His housekeeper was a little
uneasy about him. He ate nothing and his eyes were strangely bright and
feverish. She overheard him once muttering something to himself about
"the unknown quantity," and that made her think that he had been working
too hard.

She decided he must see the doctor. The Professor refused peremptorily.
He declared he would be quite well again in the morning. The
housekeeper, an old servant, agreed, but sent for the doctor all the
same; and when he had come the Professor felt he could not refuse to see
him without appearing peculiar. And he did not wish to appear peculiar.
So he saw the doctor, but declared there was nothing much the matter, he
merely felt a little unwell and out of sorts and tired.

"You have hurt your hand?" the doctor asked, noticing how it was
bandaged.

"I cut it slightly--a trifle," the Professor answered.

"Yes," the doctor answered, "I see there is blood on it."

"What?" the Professor stammered.

"There is blood upon your hand," the doctor repeated.

The Professor looked. In fact, a deep, wide stain showed crimson upon
the bandages in which he had swathed his hand. Yet he knew that the
moment before the linen had been fair and white and clean.

"It is nothing," he said quickly, hiding his hand beneath the bed
clothes.

The doctor, a little puzzled, took his leave, but had not gone ten
yards when the housekeeper flew screaming after him. It seemed she had
heard a fall, and when she had gone into the Professor's bedroom she had
found him lying there dead upon the hearthrug. There was a razor in his
hand, and there was a ghastly gash across his throat.

The doctor went back at a run, but there was nothing he or any man could
do. One thing he noticed, with curiosity, was that the bandage had been
torn away from the dead man's hand and that oddly enough there seemed to
be on the hand no sign of any cut or wound. There was a large solitary
drop of blood on the palm, at the root of the thumb; but, of course,
that was no great wonder, for the wound the dead man had dealt himself
had bled freely.

Apparently death had not been quite instantaneous, for with a last
effort the Professor seemed to have traced an _X_ upon the floor in his
own blood with his forefinger. The doctor mentioned this at the
inquest--the coroner had decided at once that in this case an inquest
was certainly necessary--and he suggested that it showed the Professor
had worked too hard and was suffering from overwork which had disturbed
his mental balance.

The coroner took the same view, and in his short address to the jury
adduced the incident as proof of a passing mental disturbance.

"Very probably," said the coroner, "there was some problem that had
worried him, and that he was still endeavouring to work out. As you are
aware, gentlemen, the sign _X_ is used to symbolise the unknown
quantity."

An appropriate verdict was accordingly returned, and the Professor was
duly interred in the same family vault as that in which so short a time
previously his cousin had been laid to rest.




II

THE ARMLESS MAN


I first met Bob Masters in the hotel at a place called Fourteen Streams,
not very far from Kimberley.

I had for some months been trying to find gold or diamonds by digging
holes in the veldt. But since this has little or nothing to do with the
story, I pass by my mining adventures and come back to the hotel. I came
to it very readily that afternoon, for I was very thirsty.

A tall man standing at the bar turned his head as I entered and said
"Good-day" to me. I returned the compliment, but took no particular
notice of him at first.

Suddenly I heard the man say to the barman:

"I'm ready for another drink."

That surprised me, because his glass was still three-quarters full. But
I was still more startled by the action of the barman who lifted up the
glass and held it whilst the man drank.

Then I saw the reason. The man had no arms.

You know the easy way in which Englishmen chum together anywhere out of
England, whilst in their native country nothing save a formal
introduction will make them acquainted? I made some remark to Masters
which led to another from him, and in five minutes' time we were
chatting on all sorts of topics.

I learnt that Masters, bound for England, had come in to Fourteen
Streams to catch the train from Kimberley, and, having a few hours to
wait, had strolled up to the collection of tin huts calling itself a
town.

I was going down to Kimberley too, so of course we went together, and
were quite old friends by the time we reached that city.

We had a wash and something to eat, and then we walked round to the
post-office. I used to have my letters addressed there, _poste
restante_, and call in for them when I happened to be in Kimberley.

I found several letters, one of which altered the whole course of my
life. This was from Messrs. Harvey, Filson, and Harvey, solicitors,
Lincoln's Inn Fields. It informed me that the sudden death of my cousin
had so affected my uncle's health that he had followed his only son
within the month. The senior branch of the family being thus extinct the
whole of the entailed estate had devolved on me.

The first thing I did was to send off two cablegrams to say that I was
coming home by the first available boat, one to the solicitors, the
other to Nancy Milward.

Masters and I arranged to come home together and eventually reached Cape
Town. There we had considerable trouble at the shipping office. It was
just about the time of year when people who live in Africa to make
money, come over to England to spend it, and in consequence the boats
were very crowded. Masters demanded a cabin to himself, a luxury which
was not to be had, though there was one that he and I could share. He
made a tremendous fuss about doing this, and I thought it very strange,
because I had assisted him in many ways which his mutilation rendered
necessary. However, he had to give way in the end, and we embarked on
the Castle liner.

On the voyage he told me how he had lost his arms. It seemed that he had
been sent up country on some Government job or other, and had had the
ill-fortune to be captured by the natives. They treated him quite well
at first, but gave him to understand that he must not try to escape. I
suppose that to most men such a warning would be a direct incitement to
make the attempt. Masters made it and failed. They cut off his right arm
as a punishment. He waited until the wound was healed and tried again.
Again he failed. This time they cut off his other arm.

"Good Lord," I cried. "What devils!"

"Weren't they!" he said. "And yet, you know, they were quite
good-tempered chaps when you didn't cross them. I wasn't going to be
beaten by a lot of naked niggers though, and I made a third attempt.

"I succeeded all right that time, though, of course, it was much more
difficult. I really don't know at all how I managed to worry through.
You see, I could only eat plants and leaves and such fruit as I came
across; but I'd learnt as much as I could of the local botany in the
intervals."

"Was it worth while?" I asked. "I think the first failure and its result
would have satisfied me."

"Yes," he said slowly, "it was worth while. You see, my wife was waiting
for me at home, and I wanted to see her again very badly--you don't
know how badly."

"I think I can imagine," I said. "Because there is a girl waiting for me
too at home."

"I saw her before she died," he continued.

"Died?" I said.

"Yes," he answered. "She was dying when I reached home at last, but I
was with her at the end. That was something, wasn't it?"

I do hate people to tell me this sort of thing. Not because I do not
feel sorry for them; on the contrary, I feel so sorry that I absolutely
fail to find words to express my sympathy. I tried, however, to show it
in other ways, by the attentions I paid him and by anticipating his
every wish.

Yet there were many things that were astonishing about his actions,
things that I wonder now I did not realise must have been impossible for
him to do for himself, and that yet were done. But he was so
surprisingly dexterous with his lips, and feet too, when he was in his
cabin that I suppose I put them down to that.

I remember waking up one night and looking out of my bunk to see him
standing on the floor. The cabin was only faintly lit by a moonbeam
which found its way through the porthole. I could not see clearly, but I
fancied that he walked to the door and opened it, and closed it behind
him. He did it all very quickly, as quickly as I could have done it. As
I say, I was very sleepy, but the sight of the door opening and shutting
like that woke me thoroughly. Sitting up I shouted at him.

He heard me and opened the door again, easily, too, much more easily
than he seemed to be able to shut it when he saw me looking at him.

"Hullo! Awake, old chap?" he said. "What is it?"

"Er--nothing," I said. "Or rather I suppose I was only half awake; but
you seemed to open that door so easily that it quite startled me."

"One does not always like to let others see the shifts to which one has
to resort," was all the answer he gave me.

But I worried over it. The thing bothered me, because he had made no
attempt to explain.

That was not the only thing I noticed.

Two or three days later we were sitting together on deck. I had offered
to read to him. I noticed that he got up out of his chair. Suddenly I
saw the chair move. It gave me a great shock, for the chair twisted
apparently of its own volition, so that when he sat down again the
sunlight was at his back and not in his eyes, as I knew it had been
previously. But I reasoned with myself and managed to satisfy myself
that he must have turned the chair round with his foot. It was just
possible that he could have done so, for it had one of those light
wicker-work seats.

We had a lovely voyage for three-quarters of the way, and the sea was as
calm as any duck-pond. But that was all altered when we passed Cape
Finisterre. I have done a lot of knocking about on the ocean one way and
another, but I never saw the Bay of Biscay deserve its reputation
better.

I'd much rather see what is going on than be cooped up below, and after
lunch I told Bob I was going up on deck.

"I'll only stay there for a bit," I said. "You make yourself comfortable
down here."

I filled his pipe, put it in his mouth, and gave him a match; then I
left him.

I made my way up and down the deck for a time, clutching hold of
everything handy, and rather enjoyed it, though the waves drenched me to
the skin.

Presently I saw Masters come out of the companion-way and make his way
very skilfully towards me. Of course it was fearfully dangerous for him.

I staggered towards him, and, putting my lips to his ear, shouted to him
to go below at once.

"Oh, I shall be all right!" he said, and laughed.

"You'll be drowned--drowned," I screamed. "There was a wave just now
that--well, if I hadn't been able to cling on with both hands like grim
death, I should have gone overboard. Go below."

He laughed again and shook his head.

And then what I dreaded happened. A vast mountain of green water lifted
up its bulk and fell upon us in a ravening cataract. I clutched at
Masters, but trying to save him and myself handicapped me badly. The
strength of that mass of water was terrible. It seemed to snatch at
everything with giant hands, and drag all with it. It tossed a hen-coop
high, and carried it through the rails.

I felt the grip of my right hand loosen, and the next instant was
carried, still clutching Masters with my left, towards that gap in the
bulwark.

I managed to seize the end of the broken rail. It held us for a moment,
then gave, and for a moment I hung sheer over the vessel's side.

In that instant I felt fingers tighten on my arm, tighten till they bit
into the flesh, and I was pulled back into safety.

Together we staggered back, and got below somehow. I was trembling like
a leaf, and the sweat dripped from me. I almost screamed aloud.

It was not that I was frightened of death. I've seen too much of that in
many parts of the earth to dread it greatly. It was the thought of those
fingers tightening on me where no fingers were.

Masters did not speak a word, nor did I, until we found ourselves in the
cabin.

I tore the wet clothes off me and turned my arm to the mirror. I knew I
could not have been mistaken when I felt them.

There on the upper arm, above the line of sunburn that one gets from
working with sleeves rolled up, there on the white skin showed _the red
marks of four slender fingers and a thumb_! I sat down suddenly at sight
of them, and pulling open a drawer, found a flask of neat brandy, and
gulped it down, emptied it in one gulp.

Then I turned to him and pointed to the marks.

"In God's name, how came these here?" I said. "What--what happened up
there on deck?"

He looked at me very gravely.

"I saved you," he said, "or rather I didn't, for I could not. But _she_
did."

"What do you mean?" I stammered.

"Let me get these clothes off," he said, "and some dry ones on; and I'll
tell you."

Words fail to describe my feelings as I watched the clothes come off him
and dry ones go on just as if hands were arranging them.

I sat and shuddered. I tried to close my eyes, but the weird, unnatural
sight drew them as a lodestone.

"I'm sorry that you should have had this shock," he said. "I know what
it must have been like, though it was not so bad for me when they seemed
to come, for they came gradually as time went on."

"What came gradually?" I asked.

"Why, these arms! They're what I'm telling you about. You asked me to
tell you, I thought?"

"Did I?" I said. "I don't know what I'm saying or asking. I think I'm
going mad, quite mad."

"No," he said, "you're as sane as I am, only when you come across
something strange, unique for that matter, you are naturally terrified.
Well, it was like this. I told you about my adventures with the niggers
up country. That was quite true. They cut off both my arms--you can see
the stumps for that matter. And I told you that I came home to find my
wife dying. Her heart had always been weak, I'd known that, and it had
gradually grown more feeble. There must have been, indeed there was, a
strange sort of telepathy between us. She had had fearful attacks of
heart failure on both occasions when the niggers had mutilated me, I
learnt on comparing notes.

"But I had known too, somehow, that I must escape at all costs. It was
the knowledge that made me try again after each failure. I should have
gone on trying to escape as long as I had lived, or rather as long as
she had lived. I knelt beside her bed and she put out her arms and laid
them round my neck.

"'So you have come back to me before I go,' she said. 'I knew you must,
because I called you so. But you have been long in coming, almost too
long. But I knew I had to see you again before I died.'

"I broke down then. I was sorely tried. No arms even to put round her!

"'Darling, stay with me for a little, only for a little while!' I
sobbed.

"She shook her head feebly. 'It is no use, my dear,' she said, 'I must
go.'

"'I'll come with you,' I said, 'I'll not live without you.'

"She shook her head again.

"'You must be brave, Bob. I shall be watching you afterwards just as
much as if I still lived on earth. If only I could give you my arms! A
poor, weak woman's arms, but better than none, dear.'

"She died some weeks later. I spent all the time at her bedside, I
hardly left her. Her arms were round me when she died. Shall I ever feel
them round me again? I wonder! You see, they are mine now.

"They came to me gradually. It was very strange at first to have arms
and hands which one couldn't see. I used to keep my eyes shut as much as
possible, and try to fancy that I had never lost my arms.

"I got used to them in time. But I have always been careful not to let
people see me do things that they would know to be impossible for an
armless man. That was what took me to Africa again, because I could get
lost there and do things for myself with these hands."

"'And they twain shall be one flesh,'" I muttered.

"Yes," he said, "I think the explanation must be something of that sort.
There's more than that in it, though; these arms are other than flesh."

He sat silent for a time with his head bowed on his chest. Then he spoke
again:

"I got sick of being alone at last, and was coming back when I met you
at Fourteen Streams. I don't know what I shall do when I do get home. I
can never rest. I have--what do they call it--_Wanderlust_?"

"Does she ever speak to you from that other world?" I asked him.

He shook his head sadly.

"No, never. But I know she lives somewhere beyond this world of ours.
She must, because these arms live. So I try always to act as if she
watches everything. I always try to do the right thing, but, anyway,
these arms and hands would do good of their own accord. Just now up on
the deck I was very frightened. I'd have saved myself at any cost
almost, and let you go. But I could not do that. The hands clutched you.
It is her will, so much stronger and purer than mine, that still
persists. It is only when she does not exert it that I control these
arms."

That was how I learnt the strangest tale that ever a man was told, and
knew the miracle to which I owed my life.

It may be that Bob Masters was a coward. He always said that he was.
Personally I do not believe it, for he had the sweetest nature I ever
met.

He had nowhere to go to in England and seemed to have no friends. So I
made him come down with me to Englehart, that dear old country seat of
my family in the Western shires which was now mine.

Nancy lived in that country, too.

There was no reason why we should not get married at once. We had waited
long enough.

I can see again the old, ivy-grown church where Nancy and I were wed,
and Bob Masters standing by my side as best man.

I remember feeling in his pocket for the ring, and as I did so, I felt a
hand grasp mine for a moment.

Then there was the reception afterwards, and speech-making--the usual
sort of thing.

Later Nancy and I drove off to the station.

We had not said good-bye to Bob, for he'd insisted on driving to the
station with the luggage; said he was going to see the last of us there.

He was waiting for us in the yard when we reached it, and walked with us
on to the platform.

We stood there chatting about one thing and another, when I noticed that
Nancy was not talking much and seemed rather pale. I was just going to
remark on it when we heard the whistle of the train. There is a sharp
curve in the permanent way outside the station, so that a train is on
you all of a sudden.

Suddenly to my horror I saw Nancy sway backwards towards the edge of the
platform. I tried vainly to catch her as she reeled and fell--right in
front of the oncoming train. I sprang forward to leap after her, but
hands grasped me and flung me back so violently that I fell down on the
platform.

It was Bob Masters who took the place that should have been mine, and
leapt upon the metals.

I could not see what happened then. The station-master says he saw Nancy
lifted from before the engine when it was right upon her. He says it was
as if she was lifted by the wind. She was quite close to Masters. "Near
enough for him to have lifted her, sir, if he'd had arms." The two of
them staggered for a moment, and together fell clear of the train.

Nancy was little the worse for the awful accident, bruised, of course,
but poor Masters was unconscious.

We carried him into the waiting-room, laid him on the cushions there,
and sent hot-foot for the doctor.

He was a good country practitioner, and, I suppose, knew the ordinary
routine of his work quite well. He fussed about, hummed and hawed a lot.

"Yes, yes," he said, as if he were trying to persuade himself. "Shock,
you know. He'll be better presently. Lucky, though, that he had no
arms."

I noticed then, for the first time, that the sleeves of the coat had
been shorn away.

"Doctor," I said, "how is he? Surely, if he isn't hurt he would not look
like that. What exactly do you mean by shock?"

"Hum--er," he hesitated, and applied his stethoscope to Masters' heart
again.

"The heart is very weak," he said at length. "Very weak. He's always
very anæmic, I suppose?"

"No," I answered. "He's anything but that. He's----Good Lord, he's
bleeding to death! Put ligatures on his arms. Put ligatures on his
arms."

"Please keep quiet, Mr. Riverston," the doctor said. "It must have been
a dreadful experience for you, and you are naturally very upset."

I raved and cursed at him. I think I should have struck him, but the
others held me. They said they would take me away if I did not keep
quiet.

Bob Masters opened his eyes presently, and saw them holding me.

"Please let him go," he said. "It's all right, old man. It's no use your
arguing with them, they would not understand. I could never explain to
them now, and they would never believe you. Besides, it's all for the
best. Yes, the train went over them and I'm armless for the second time.
But--not for long!"

I knelt by his side and sobbed. It all seemed so dreadful, and yet, I
don't think that then I would have tried to stay his passing. I knew it
was best for him.

He looked at me very affectionately.

"I'm so sorry that this should happen on your wedding-day," he said.
"But it would have been so much worse for you if _she_ had not helped."

His voice grew fainter and died away.

There was a pause for a time, and his breath came in great sighing sobs.

Then suddenly he raised himself on the cushions until he stood upright
on his feet, and a smile broke over his face--a smile so sweet that I
think the angels in Paradise must look like that.

His voice came strong and loud from his lips.

"Darling!" he cried. "Darling, your arms are round me once again! I
come! I come!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"One of the most extraordinary cases I have ever met with," the doctor
told the coroner at the inquest. "He seemed to have all the symptoms of
excessive hæmorrhage."




III

THE TOMTOM CLUE


I had just settled down for a comfortable evening over the fire in a
saddle-bag chair drawn up as close to the hearth as the fender would
allow, with a plentiful supply of literature and whisky, and pipe and
tobacco, when the telephone bell rang loudly and insistently. With a
sigh I rose and took up the receiver.

"That you?" said a voice I recognised as that of Jack Bridges. "Can I
come round and see you at once? It's most important. No, I can't tell
you now. I'll be with you in a few minutes."

I hung the receiver up again, wondering what business could fetch Jack
Bridges round at that time of the evening to see me. We had been the
greatest of pals at school and at the 'Varsity, and had kept the
friendship up ever since, despite my intermittent wanderings over the
face of the globe. But during the last few days or so Jack had become
engaged to Miss Glanville, the daughter of old Glanville, of South
African fame, and as a love-sick swain I naturally expected to see very
little of him, until after the wedding at any rate.

At this time of the evening, according to my ideas of engaged couples,
he should be sitting in the stalls at some theatre, and not running
round to see bachelor friends with cynical views on matrimony.

I had not arrived at a satisfactory solution when the door opened and
Jack walked in. One glance at his face told me that he was in trouble,
and without a word I pushed him into my chair and handed him a drink.
Then I sat down on the opposite side of the fire and waited for him to
begin, for a man in need of sympathy does not want to be worried by
questions.

He gulped down half his whisky and sat for a moment gazing into the
fire.

"Jim, old man," he said at length, "I've had awful news."

"Not connected with Miss Glanville?" I asked.

"In a way, yes. It's broken off, but there's worse than that--far worse.
I can hardly realise it; I feel numbed at present; it's too horrible.
You remember that when you and I were at Winchester together my father
was killed during the Matabele War?"

I nodded.

"Well," continued Jack, "I heard to-day that he was not killed by the
Matabele, but was hanged in Bulawayo for murder. In other words, I am
the son of a murderer."

"Hanged for murder!" I exclaimed in horror. "Surely there's some
mistake?"

"No," groaned Jack, "it's true enough. I've seen the newspaper cutting
of the time, and I'm the son of a murderer, who was also a forger, a
thief, and a card-sharper. Old Glanville told me this evening. It was
then that our engagement was broken off."

"Your mother?" I asked. "Have you seen her?"

Jack nodded.

"Poor little woman!" he groaned. "She has known all along, and her one
aim and object in life has been to keep the awful truth from me. That
was why I was told he died an honourable death during the war. I've
often wondered why the little mother was always so sad, and so weighed
down by trouble. Now I know. Good God, what her life must have been!"

He rose from his chair and paced up and down the room for a minute; then
he stopped and stood in front of me, his face working with emotion.

"But I don't believe it, Jim," he said, and there was a ring in his
voice. "I don't believe it, and neither does the little mother. It's
impossible to reconcile the big, bluff man with the heart of a child,
that I remember as my father, with murder, forgery, or any other crime.
And yet, according to Glanville and the old newspapers he showed me,
Richard Bridges was one of the most unscrupulous ruffians in South
Africa. In my heart of hearts I know he didn't do it, and though on the
face of it there's no doubt, I'm going to try and clear his name. I am
sailing for South Africa on Friday."

"Sailing for South Africa!" I exclaimed. "What about your work?"

"My work can go hang!" replied Jack heatedly. "I want to wipe away the
stain from my father's name, and I mean to do it somehow. That's why
I've run round to see you, old pal, for I want you to come with me.
Knowing Rhodesia as you do, you're just the man to help me. Say you'll
come?" he pleaded.

It seemed quite the forlornest hope I had ever heard of, but Jack's
distress was so acute that I hadn't the heart to refuse.

"All right, Jack," I said, "I'm with you. But don't foster any vain
hopes. Remember, it's twenty years ago. It will be a pretty tough job to
prove anything after all these years."

During the voyage out we had ample time to go through the small amount
of information about the long-forgotten case that Jack had been able to
collect from the family solicitors.

In the year 1893, Richard Bridges, who was a mining engineer of some
standing, had made a trip to Rhodesia with a view to gold and diamond
prospecting. He had been accompanied by a friend, Thomas Symes, who, so
far as we could ascertain, was an ex-naval officer; and the two, after a
short stay at Bulawayo, had gone northward across the Guai river into
what was in those days a practically unknown land. In a little over a
year's time Bridges had returned alone--his companion having been, so he
stated, killed by the Matabele, and for six months or so he led a
dissolute life in Bulawayo and the district, which ended ultimately in
his execution for murder. There was no doubt whatever about the murder,
or the various thefts and forgeries that he was accused of, as he had
made a confession at his trial, and we seemed to be on a wild-goose
chase of the worst variety so far as I could see; but Jack, confident of
his father's innocence, would not hear of failure.

"It's impossible to make surmises at this stage," he said. "On the face
of it there appears to be little room for doubt, but no one who knew my
father could possibly connect him with any sort of crime. Somehow or
other, Jim, I've got to clear his name."

My memory went back to a tall, sunburnt man with a kindly manner who had
come down to the school one day and put up a glorious feed at the tuck
shop to Jack and his friends. Afterwards, at his son's urgent request,
he had bared his chest to show us his tattooing of which Jack had,
boy-like, often boasted to us. I recalled how we had gazed admiringly at
the skilfully worked picture of Nelson with his empty sleeve and closed
eye and the inscription underneath: "England expects that every man this
day will do his duty." Jack had explained with considerable pride that
this did not constitute all, as on his father's back was a wonderful
representation of the _Victory_, and on other parts of his body a lion,
a snake, and other _fauna_, but Richard Bridges had protested laughingly
and refused to undress further for our delectation.

We reached Bulawayo, but no one in the city appeared to recall the case
at all; indeed, Bulawayo had grown out of all recognition since Richard
Bridges had passed through it on his prospecting trip. It was difficult
to know where to start. Even the police could not help, and had no
knowledge of where the murderer had been buried. No one but an old
saloon-keeper and a couple of miners could recollect the execution even,
and they, so far as they could remember, had never met Richard Bridges
in the flesh, though his unsavoury reputation was well known to them.

In despair, Jack suggested a trek up country towards Barotseland, which
was the district that Bridges and Symes had proposed to prospect,
though, according to all accounts, Symes had been murdered by the
Matabele before they reached the Guai river.

For the next month we trekked steadily northwards, having very fair
sport; but, as I expected, extracting no information whatever from the
natives about the two prospectors who had passed that way years before.
At length, Jack became more or less reconciled to failure, and realising
the futility of further search suggested a return to Bulawayo. As our
donkey caravan was beginning to suffer severely from the fly, I
concurred, and we started to travel slowly back to Bulawayo, shooting by
the way.

One night after a particularly hard trek we inspanned at an old _kraal_,
the painted walls of which told that at one time it had served as a
royal residence, and as I had shot an eland cow that afternoon, which
provided far more meat than we could consume, we invited the induna and
his tribe to the feast. Not to be outdone in hospitality, the old chief
produced the kaffir beer of the country, a liquid which has nothing to
recommend it beyond the fact that it intoxicates rapidly.

A meat feast and a beer drink is a great event in the average kaffir's
life, and as the evening wore on a general jollification started to the
thump of tomtoms and the squeak of kaffir fiddles. There was one very
drunk old Barotse, who sat close to me, and, accompanying himself with
thumps on his tomtom, sang in one droning key a song about a man who
kept snakes and lions inside him, and from whose chest the evil eye
looked out. At least, so far as I could gather that was roughly the gist
of the song; but as his tomtom was particularly large and most obnoxious
I politely took it away from him, and Jack and I used it as a table for
our gourds of kaffir beer, which we were pretending to consume in large
quantities.

A gourd, however, is a top-heavy sort of drinking vessel, and in a very
short time I had succeeded in spilling half a pint or so of my drink on
the parchment of the drum. Not wishing to spoil the old gentleman's
plaything, which he evidently valued above all things, I mopped up the
beer with my handkerchief, and in doing so removed from the parchment a
portion of the accumulated filth of ages.

"Hullo!" said Jack, taking the instrument from me and holding it up to
the firelight. "There's a picture of some sort here. It looks like a man
in a cocked hat."

He rubbed it hard with his pocket handkerchief, and the polishing
brought more of the picture to light, till, plain enough in places and
faded in others, there stood out, the portrait of a man in an
old-fashioned naval uniform with stars on his breast, and underneath
some letters in the form of a scroll.

"That's not native work," I exclaimed. "These are English letters," for
I could distinctly make out the word "man" followed by a "t" and an "h."
"Rub it hard, Jack."

The grease on the parchment refused to give way to further polishing,
however, and remembering a bottle of ammonia I kept for insect bites, I
mixed some with kaffir beer and poured it on the head of the tomtom. One
touch of the handkerchief was sufficient once the strong alkali got to
work, and out came the grand old face of Nelson and underneath his
motto:

"England expects that every man this day will do his duty."

Jack dropped the drum as if it had bitten him.

"What does it mean?" he gasped. "My father had this on his chest. I
remember it well!"

I was, however, too busy with the reverse end of the drum to heed him.
On the other side the ammonia brought out a picture of the _Victory_,
with the head of a roaring lion below it.

"Good God!" exclaimed Jack. "My father had that on his back. Quick, Jim,
rub hard! There should be the family crest to the right--an eagle with a
snake in its talons and R. B. underneath."

I rubbed in the spot indicated, and out came the crest and initials
exactly as Jack had described them. There was something horribly uncanny
and gruesome in finding the tattoo marks of the dead man on the
parchment of a Barotse tomtom two hundred miles north of the Zambesi,
and for a moment I was too overcome with astonishment to grasp exactly
what it meant. Then it came to my mind in a flash that the parchment was
nothing else than human skin, and Richard Bridges' skin at that. I put
it down with sudden reverence, and, beckoning to its owner, demanded its
full history. At first he showed signs of fear, but promising him a
waist length of cloth if he told the truth, he squatted on his hams
before us and began.

"Many, many moons ago, before the white men came to trade across the Big
Water as they do now, two white baases came into this country to look
for white stones and gold. One baas was bigger than the other, and on
his chest and on his body were pictures of birds, and beasts, and
strange things. On his chest was a great inkoos with one eye covered,
and on his back a hut with trees growing straight up into the air from
it. On his loins was a lion of great fierceness, and coiled round his
waist was a hissing mamba (snake). We were sore afraid, for the white
baas told us he was bewitched, and that if harm came to either he would
uncover the closed eye of the great inkoos upon his chest, which was the
Evil Eye, and command him to blast the Barotse and their land for ever.

"So the white men were suffered to come and go in peace, for we dreaded
the Evil Eye of the great inkoos. They toiled, these white baases,
digging in the hillside and searching the riverbed; and then one day it
came to pass that they quarrelled and fought, and the baas with the
pictures was slain. We knew then that his medicine was bad medicine,
otherwise the white baas without the pictures could not have killed him.
So we were wroth and made to slay the other baas, but he shot us down
with a fire stick and returned to his own country in haste. Then did I
take the skin from the dead baas, for I loved him for his pictures, and
I made them into a tomtom. I have spoken."

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Jack when I had translated the story. "Then my
father was killed here in Barotseland, and it was Symes, his murderer,
who went back to Bulawayo. It was that fiend Symes, also, who took my
father's name, probably to draw any money that might have been left
behind, and who, as Richard Bridges, was hanged for murder. Poor old
dad," he added brokenly, "murdered, and his body mutilated by savages!
But how glad I am to know that he died an honest man!"

With the evidence at hand it was easy to prove the identity of the
murderer of twenty years ago, and, having settled the matter
satisfactorily and cleared the dead man's name, Jack and I returned to
England, where a few weeks later I had to purchase wedding garments in
order that I might play the part of best man at Jack's wedding.




IV

THE CASE OF SIR ALISTER MOERAN


"Ethne?" My aunt looked at me with raised brows and smiled. "My dear
Maurice, hadn't you heard? Ethne went abroad directly after Christmas,
with the Wilmotts, for a trip to Egypt. She's having a glorious time!"

I am afraid I looked as blank as I felt. I had only landed in England
three days ago, after two years' service in India, and the one thing I
had been looking forward to was seeing my cousin Ethne again.

"Then, since you did not know she was away, you, of course, have not
heard the other news?" went on my aunt.

"No," I answered in a wooden voice. "I've heard nothing."

She beamed. "The dear child is engaged to a Sir Alister Moeran, whom she
met in Luxor. Everyone is delighted, as it is a splendid match for her.
Lady Wilmott speaks most highly of him, a man of excellent family and
position, and perfectly charming to boot."

I believe I murmured something suitable, but it was absurd to pretend to
be overjoyed at the news. The galling part of it was that Aunt Linda
knew, and was chuckling, so to speak, over my discomfiture.

"If you are going up to Wimberley Park," she went on sweetly, "you will
probably meet them both, as your Uncle Bob has asked us all there for
the February house-party. He cabled an invitation to Sir Alister as soon
as he heard of the engagement. Wasn't it good of him?"

I replied that it was; then, having heard quite enough for one day of
the charms of Ethne's _fiancé_, I took my leave.

That night, after cursing myself for a churl, I wrote and wished her
good luck. The next morning I received a letter from Uncle Bob asking me
to go to Wimberley; and early in the following week I travelled up to
Cumberland. I received a warm welcome from the old General. As a boy I
used to spend the greater part of my holidays with him, and being
childless himself, he regarded me more or less as a son.

On February 16th Ethne, her mother, and Sir Alister Moeran arrived. I
motored to the station to meet them. The evening was cold and raw and so
dark that it was almost impossible to distinguish people on the badly
lighted little platform. However, as I groped my way along, I recognised
Ethne's voice, and thus directed, hurried towards the group. As I did so
two gleaming, golden eyes flashed out at me through the darkness.

"Hullo!" I thought. "So she's carted along the faithful Pincher!" But
the next moment I found I was mistaken, for Ethne was holding out both
hands to me in greeting. There was no dog with her, and in the bustle
that followed, I forgot to seek further for the solution of those two
fiery lights.

"It was good of you to come, Maurice," Ethne said with unmistakable
pleasure, then, turning to the man at her side, "Alister, this is my
cousin, Captain Kilvert, of whom you have heard me speak."

We murmured the usual formalities in the usual manner, but as my fingers
touched his, I experienced the most curious sensation down the region of
my spine. It took me back to Burma and a certain very uncomfortable
night that I once passed in the jungle. But the impression was so
fleeting as to be indefinable, and soon I was busy getting everyone
settled in the car.

So far, except that he possessed an exceptionally charming voice, I had
no chance of forming an opinion of my cousin's _fiancé_. It was
half-past seven when we got back to the house, so we all went straight
up to our rooms to dress for dinner.

Everyone was assembled in the drawing-room when Sir Alister Moeran came
in, and I shall never forget the effect his appearance made.
Conversation ceased entirely for an instant. There was a kind of
breathless pause, which was almost audible as my uncle rose to greet
him. In all my life I had never seen a handsomer man, and I don't
suppose anyone else there had either. It was the most startling,
arresting style of beauty one could possibly imagine, and yet, even as I
stared at him in admiration, the word "Black!" flashed into my mind.

Black! I pulled myself up sharply. We English, who have lived out in the
East, are far too prone to stigmatise thus anyone who shows the smallest
trace of being a "half breed"; but in Sir Alister's case there was not
even a suspicion of this. He was no darker than scores of men of my own
nationality, and besides, he belonged, I knew, to a very old Scottish
family. Yet, try as I would to strangle the idea, all through the
evening the same horrible, unaccountable notion clung to me.

That he was the personality of the gathering there was not the slightest
doubt. Men and women alike seemed attracted by him, for his
individuality was on a par with his looks.

Several times during dinner I glanced at Ethne, but it was easy to see
that all her attention was taken up by her lover. Yet, oddly enough, I
was not jealous in the ordinary way. I saw the folly of imagining that I
could stand a chance against a man like Moeran, and, moreover, he
interested me too deeply. His knowledge of the East was extraordinary,
and later, when the ladies had retired, he related many curious
experiences.

"Might I ask," said my uncle's friend, Major Faucett, suddenly, "whether
you were in the Service, or had you a Government appointment out there?"

Sir Alister smiled, and under his moustache I caught the gleam of
strong, white teeth.

"As a matter of fact, neither. I am almost ashamed to say I have no
profession, unless I may call myself an explorer."

"And why not?" put in Uncle Bob. "Provided your explorations were to
some purpose and of benefit to the community in general, I consider you
are doing something worth while."

"Exactly," Sir Alister replied. "From my earliest boyhood I have always
had the strangest hankering for the East. I say strange, because to my
parents it was inexplicable, neither of them having the slightest
leaning in that direction, though to me it seemed the most natural
desire in the world. I was like an alien in a foreign land, longing to
get home. I recollect, as a child, my nurse thought me a beastly uncanny
kid because I loved to lie in bed and listen to the cats howling and
fighting outside. I used to put my head half under the blankets and
imagine I was in my lair in the jungle, and those were the jackals and
panthers prowling around outside."

"I suppose you'd been reading adventure books," Uncle Bob said, with a
laugh. "I played at much the same game when I was a youngster, only in
my case it was Redskins."

"Possibly," Sir Alister answered with a slight shrug, "only mine wasn't
a game that I played with any other boys, it was a gnawing desire, which
simply had to be satisfied; and the opportunity came. When I was
fourteen, the father of a school friend of mine, who was going out to
India, asked me to go out with him and the boy for the trip. Of course,
I went."

"I wonder," the Major remarked, "that you ever came back once you got
there, since you were so frightfully keen."

"I was certain I should return," he replied grimly.

A pause followed his last words, then Uncle Bob rose and led the way to
the drawing-room, where for the remainder of the evening Sir Alister was
chiefly monopolised by the ladies.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, Maurice," Uncle Bob said, when on the following evening I was
sitting in his study having my usual before-dinner chat with him, "and
how do you like Ethne's future husband?"

I hesitated. "I--I really don't know," I replied.

"Come, boy," he said, with his whimsical smile, "why not be frank and
own to a very natural jealousy?"

"Because," I answered simply, "the feeling Sir Alister Moeran inspires
in me is not jealousy, curiously enough. It's something else, something
indefinable that comes over me now and again. Dogs don't like him, and
that's always a bad sign, to my thinking."

My uncle's bushy eyebrows went up slightly.

"When did you make this discovery?"

"This morning," I replied. "You know I took him and Ethne round the
place. Well, the first thing I noticed was that Mike refused to come
with us, although both Ethne and I called him. As we passed through the
hall he slunk away into the library. I thought it a bit strange, as he's
usually so frantic to go out with me. Still, I didn't attach any
significance to the matter until later, when we visited the kennels. I
don't know why, but one takes it for granted that a man is keen on dogs
somehow and----"

"Isn't Sir Alister?"

"They are not keen on him, anyhow," I answered grimly. "They had heard
my voice as we approached and were all barking with delight, but
directly we entered the place there was a dead silence, save for a few
ominous growls from Argo. It was a most extraordinary sight. They all
bristled up, so to speak, sniffing the air though on the scent of
something. I let Bess and Fritz loose, but instead of jumping up, as
they usually do, they hung back and showed the whites of their eyes in a
way I've never seen before. I actually had to whistle to them sharply
several times before they came, and then it was in a slinking manner,
taking good care to put Ethne and me between themselves and Moeran, and
looking askance at him the whole while."

"H'm!" murmured the General with puckered brows. "That was certainly
odd, very odd!"

"It was," I agreed, warming to the subject, "but there's odder still to
come. I dare say you'll think it all my fancy, but the minute those
animals put their heads up and sniffed in that peculiar way, I
distinctly smelt the musky, savage odour of wild beasts. You know it
well, anyone who has been through a jungle does."

Uncle Bob nodded. "I know it, too; 'Musky' is the very word--the smell
of sun-warmed fur. Jove, how it carries me back! I remember once, years
ago, coming upon a litter of lion cubs, in a cave, when I was out in
Africa----"

"Yes! Yes!" I cried eagerly. "And that is what I smelt this morning.
Those dogs smelt it, too. They felt that there was something alien,
abnormal in their midst."

"That something being--Sir Alister Moeran?"

I felt myself flush up under his gaze. I got up and walked about the
room.

"I don't understand it," I said doggedly. "I tell you plainly, Uncle
Bob, I don't understand. My impression of the man last night was
'black,' but he's not black, I know that perfectly well, no more than
you or I are, and yet I can't get over the behaviour of those hounds.
It wasn't only one of 'em, it was the whole lot. They seemed to regard
him as their natural enemy! And that smell! I'm sure Ethne detected it
too, for she kept glancing about her in a startled, mystified way."

"And Sir Alister?" queried the General. "Do you mean to say he did not
notice anything amiss?"

I shrugged my shoulders. "He didn't appear to. I called attention myself
to the singular attitude of the hounds, and he said quite casually:
'Dogs never do take to me much.'"

Uncle Bob gave a short laugh. "Our friend is evidently not sensitive."
He paused and rubbed his chin thoughtfully, then added: "It certainly is
rather curious, but, for Heaven's sake, boy, don't get imagining all
sorts of things!"

This nettled me and made me wish I had held my tongue. I was quite aware
that my story might have sounded somewhat fantastic from a stranger;
still, he ought to have known me better than to accuse me of
imagination. I abruptly changed the subject, and shortly after left the
room.

But I could not banish from my mind the incident of the morning. I could
not forget the appealing faces of those dogs. Ethne and Sir Alister had
left me there and returned to the house together, and, after their
departure, those poor, dumb beasts had gathered round me in a way that
was absolutely pathetic, licking and fondling my hands, as though
apologising for their previous misconduct. Still, I understood. That
bristling up their spines was precisely the same sensation I had
experienced when I first met Sir Alister Moeran.

As I was slowly mounting the stairs on my way up to dress, I heard
someone running up after me, and turned round to find Ethne beside me.

"Maurice," she said, rather breathlessly, "tell me, you did not punish
Fritz and Bess for not coming at once when you called them this
morning?"

"No," I answered.

She gave a nervous little laugh. "I'm glad of that. I thought
perhaps----" She stopped short, then rushed on, "You know how queer
mother is about cats--can't bear one in the room, and how they always
fly out directly she comes in? Well, dogs are the same with Alister.
He--he told me so himself. It seems funny to me, and I suppose to you,
because we're so fond of all kinds of animals; but I don't really see
why it should be any more extraordinary to have an antipathy for dogs
than for cats, and no one thinks anything of it if you dislike cats."

"That is so," I said thoughtfully.

"Anyway," she went on, "it is not our own fault if a certain animal does
not instinctively take to us."

"Of course not," I replied stoutly. "You're surely not worrying about
it, are you?"

She hastened to assure me that she was not, but I could see that my
indorsing her opinion was a great relief to her. She had been afraid
that I should think it unnatural. I did for that matter, but I could
not, of course, tell her so.

That night Sir Alister and I sat up late talking after the other men had
retired. We had got on the subject of India and had been comparing notes
as to our different adventures. From this we went on to discussing
perilous situations and escapes, and it was then that he narrated to me
a very curious incident.

"It happened when I was only twenty-one," he said, "the year after my
father died. I think I told you that as soon as ever I became my own
master, I packed up and was off to the East. I had a friend with me, a
boy who had been my best pal at school. They used to call us 'Black and
White.' He was fair and girlish-looking, and his name was Buchanan. He
was just as keen on India as I was, and purposed writing a book
afterwards on our experiences.

"Our intention was to explore the wildest, most savage districts, and as
a start we selected the province of Orissa. The forests there are
wonderful, and it is there, if anywhere, that the almost extinct Indian
lion is still to be found. We engaged two sturdy hillmen to accompany us
and pushed our way downwards from Calcutta over mountains, rivers and
through some of the densest jungles I've ever traversed. It was on the
outskirts of one of the latter that the tragedy took place. We had
pitched our tents one evening after a long, tiring day, and turned in
early to sleep, Buchanan and I in one, and the two Bhils in the other."

Sir Alister paused for a few moments, toying with his cigar in an
abstracted manner, then continued in the same clear, even voice:

"When I awoke next morning, I found my friend lying beside me dead, and
blood all round us! His throat was torn open by the teeth of some wild
beast, his breast was horribly mauled and lacerated, and his eyes were
wide, staring open, and their expression was awful. He must have died a
hideous death and known it!"

Again he stopped, but I made no comment, only waited with breathless
interest till he went on.

"I called the two men. They came and looked, and for the first time I
saw terror written on their faces. Their nostrils quivered as though
scenting something; then 'Tiger!' they gasped simultaneously.

"One of them said he had heard a stifled scream in the night, but had
thought it merely some animal in the jungle. The whole thing was a
mystery. How I came to sleep undisturbed through it all, how I escaped
the same fate, and why the tiger did not carry off his prey----"

"You are sure it was a tiger?" I put in.

"I think there was no doubt of it," Sir Alister replied. "The Bhils
swore the teeth-marks were unmistakable, and not only that, but I saw
another case seven years later. The body of a young woman was found in
the compound outside my bungalow, done to death in precisely the same
way. And several of the natives testified as to there being a tiger in
that vicinity, for they had found three or four young goats destroyed in
similar fashion."

"Who was the girl?" I asked.

Moeran slowly turned his lucent, amber eyes upon me as he answered. "She
was a German, a sort of nursery governess at the English doctor's. He
was naturally frightfully upset about it, and a regular panic sprang up
in the neighbourhood. The natives got a superstitious scare--thought
one of their gods was wroth about something and demanded sacrifice; but
the white people were simply out to kill the tiger."

"And did they?" I queried eagerly.

Sir Alister shook his head. "That I can't say, as I left the place very
soon afterwards and went up to the mountains."

A long silence followed, during which I stared at him in mute
fascination. Then an unaccountable impulse made me say abruptly:
"Moeran, how old are you?"

His finely-marked eyebrows went up in surprise at the irrelevance of my
question, but he smiled.

"Funny you should ask! It so happens that it's my birthday to-morrow. I
shall be thirty-five."

"Thirty-five!" I repeated. Then with a shiver I rose from my seat. The
room seemed to have turned suddenly cold.

"Come," I said, "let's go to bed."

       *       *       *       *       *

Next night at dinner I proposed Sir Alister's health, and we all drank
to him and his "bride-to-be." They had that day definitely settled the
date of their marriage for two months ahead; Ethne was looking radiant
and everyone seemed in the best of spirits.

We danced and romped and played rowdy games like a pack of children.
Nothing was too silly for us to attempt. While a one-step was in full
swing some would-be wag suddenly turned off all the lights. It was then
that for a moment I caught sight of a pair of glowing, fiery eyes
shining through the darkness. Instantly my thoughts flew back to that
meeting at the station, when I had fancied that Ethne had her dog in her
arms. A chill, sinister feeling crept over me, but I kept my gaze fixed
steadily in the same direction. The next minute the lights went up, and
I found myself staring straight at Sir Alister Moeran. His arm was round
Ethne's waist and she was smiling up into his face. Almost immediately
they took up the dance again, and I and my partner followed suit. But
all my gaiety had departed. An indefinable oppression seized me and
clung to me for the rest of the evening.

As I emerged from my room next morning I saw old Giles, the butler,
hurrying down the corridor towards me.

"Oh, Mr. Maurice--Captain Kilvert, sir!" he burst out, consternation in
every line of his usually stolid countenance. "A dreadful thing has
happened! How it's come about I can't for the life of me say, and how
we're going to tell the General, the Lord only knows!"

"What?" I asked, seizing him by the arm. "What is it?"

"The dawg, sir," he answered in a hoarse whisper, "Mike--in the
study----"

I waited to hear no more, but strode off down the stairs, Giles hobbling
beside me as fast as he could, and together we entered the study.

In the middle of the floor lay the body of Mike. A horrible foreboding
gripped me, and I quickly knelt down and raised the dog's head. His neck
was torn open, bitten right through to the windpipe, the blood still
dripping from it into a dark pool on the carpet.

A cold, numbing sensation stole down my spine and made my legs grow
suddenly weak. Beads of perspiration gathered on my forehead as I
slowly rose to my feet and faced Giles.

"What's the meaning of it, sir?" he asked, passing his hand across his
brow in utter bewilderment. "That dawg was as right as possible when I
shut up last night, and he couldn't have got out."

"No," I answered mechanically, "he couldn't have got out."

"Looks like some wild beast had attacked him," muttered the old man, in
awed tones, as he bent over the lifeless body. "D'ye see the teeth
marks, sir? But it's not possible--not possible."

"No," I said again, in the same wooden fashion. "It's not possible."

"But how're we going to account for it to the General?" he cried
brokenly. "Oh, Mr. Maurice, sir, it's dreadful!"

I nodded. "You're right, Giles! Still, it isn't your fault, nor mine.
Leave the matter to me. I'll break it to my uncle."

It was a most unenviable task, but I did it. Poor Uncle Bob! I shall
never forget his face when he saw the mutilated body of the dog that for
years had been his faithful companion. He almost wept, only rage and
resentment against the murderer were so strong in him that they thrust
grief for the time into the background. The mysterious, incomprehensible
manner of the dog's death only added to his anger, for there was
apparently no one on whom to wreak his vengeance.

The news caused general concern throughout the house, and Ethne was
frightfully upset.

"Oh, Alister, isn't it awful?" she exclaimed, tears standing in her
pretty blue eyes. "Poor, darling Mike!"

"Yes," he answered rather absently. "It's most unfortunate. Valuable
dog, too, wasn't it?"

I walked away. The man's calm, handsome face filled me suddenly with
unspeakable revulsion. The atmosphere of the room seemed to become heavy
and noisome. I felt compelled to get out into the open to breathe.

I found the General tramping up and down the drive in the rain, his chin
sunk deep into the collar of his overcoat, his hat pulled low down over
his eyes. I joined him without speaking, and in silence we paced side by
side for another quarter of an hour.

"Uncle Bob," I said abruptly at last, "take my advice. Have one of the
hounds indoors to-night--Princep, he's a good watch-dog."

The General stopped short in his walk and looked at me.

"You've something on your mind, boy. What is it?"

"This," I answered grimly. "Whoever, or whatever killed Mike was in the
house last night, or got in, after Giles shut up. It may still be there
for all we know. In the dark, dark deeds are done, and--well, I think
it's wise to take precautions."

"Good God, Maurice, if there is any creature in hiding, we'll soon have
it out! I'll have the place searched now. But the thing's impossible,
absurd!"

I shrugged my shoulders. "Then Mike died a natural death?"

"Natural?" he echoed fiercely. "Don't talk rubbish!"

"In that case," I said quietly, "you'll agree to let one of the dogs
sleep in."

He gave me a long, troubled, searching look, then said gruffly: "Very
well, but don't make any fuss about it. Women are such nervous beings
and we don't want to upset anyone."

"You needn't be afraid of that," I replied, "I'll manage it all right."

There was no further talk of Mike that day. The visitors, seeing how
distressed the General was, by tacit consent avoided the subject, but
everyone felt the dampening effect.

That night, before I retired to my room, I took a lantern, went out to
the kennels and brought in Princep, a pure-bred Irish setter. He was a
dog of exceptional intelligence, and when I spoke to him, explaining the
reason of his presence indoors, he seemed to know instinctively what was
required of him.

As I passed the study I noticed a light coming from under the door.
Somewhat surprised, I turned the handle and looked in. My uncle was
seated before his desk in the act of loading a revolver. He glanced up
sharply as I entered.

"Oh, it's you, is it? Got the dog in?"

"Yes," I replied, "I've left him in the library with the door open."

He regarded the revolver pensively for a few moments, then laid it down
in front of him.

"You've no theory as to this--this business?"

I shook my head, I could offer no explanation. Yet all the while there
lurked, deep down in my heart, a hideous suspicion, a suspicion so
monstrous that had I voiced it, I should probably have been considered
mad. And so I held my peace on the subject and merely wished my uncle
good-night.

It was about one o'clock when I got into bed, but my brain was far too
agitated for sleep. Something I had heard years ago, some old wives'
tales about a man's life changing every seven years, kept dinning in my
head. I was striving to remember how the story went, when a slight sound
outside caught my ear. In a second I was out of bed and had silently
opened the door. As I did so, someone passed close by me down the
corridor.

Cautiously, with beating heart, I crept out and followed. However, I
almost exclaimed aloud in my amazement, for the light from a window fell
full on the figure ahead of me, and I recognised my cousin Ethne. She
was sleep-walking, a habit she had had from her childhood, and which
apparently she had never outgrown.

For some minutes I stood there, undecided how to act, while she passed
on down the stairs, out of sight. To wake her I knew would be wrong. I
knew, also, that she had walked thus a score of times without coming to
any harm. There was, therefore, no reason why I should not return to my
room and leave her to her wandering, yet still I remained rooted to the
spot, all my senses strained, alert. And then suddenly I heard Princep
whine. A series of low, stertorous growls followed, growls that made my
blood run cold! With swift, noiseless steps, I stole along to the
minstrel's gallery which overlooked that portion of the hall that
communicated with the library. As I did so, there arose from immediately
below me a succession of sharp snarls, such as a dog gives when he is
in deadly fear or pain.

A shaft of moonlight fell across the polished floor, and by its aid I
was just able to distinguish the form of Princep crouched against the
wainscoting. He was breathing heavily, his head turned all the while
towards the opposite side of the room. I looked in the same direction.
Out of the darkness gleamed two fiery, golden orbs, two eyes that moved
slowly to and fro, backwards and forwards, as though the Thing were
prowling round and round. Now it seemed to crouch as though ready to
spring, and I could hear the savage growling as of some beast of prey.

As I watched, horrified, fascinated, a _portière_ close by was lifted,
and the white-robed figure of Ethne appeared. All heedless of danger she
came on across the hall, and the Thing, with soft, stealthy tread, came
after her. I knew then that there was not an instant to be lost, and
like a flash I darted along the gallery and down the stairs. But ere I
gained the hall a piercing scream rent the air, and I was just in time
to see Ethne borne to the ground by a great, dark form, which had sprung
at her like a tiger.

Half frantic, I dashed forward, snatching as I did so a rapier from the
wall, the only weapon handy. But before I reached the spot, a voice from
the study doorway called: "Stop!" and the next moment the report of a
pistol rang out.

"Good God!" I cried. "Who have you shot?"

"Not the girl," answered the grim voice of my uncle, "you may trust my
aim for that! I fired at the eyes of the Thing. Here, quick, get lights
and let's see what has happened."

But my one and only thought was for Ethne. Moving across to the dark
mass on the floor, I stretched out my hand. My fingers touched a smooth,
fabric-like cloth, but the smell was the smell of fur, the musky,
sun-warmed fur of the jungle! With sickening repugnance, I seized the
Thing by its two broad shoulders and rolled it over. Then I carefully
raised Ethne from the ground. At that moment Giles and a footman
appeared with candles. In silence my uncle took one and came towards me,
the servants with scared, blanched countenances following.

The light fell full upon the dead, upturned face of Sir Alister Moeran.
His upper lip was drawn back, showing the strong, white teeth. The two
front ones were tipped with blood. Instantly my eyes turned to Ethne's
throat, and there I saw deep, horrible marks, like the marks of a
tiger's fangs; but, thank God, they had not penetrated far enough to do
any serious injury! My uncle's shot had come just in time to save her.

"Merely fainted, hasn't she?" he asked anxiously.

I nodded. My relief at finding this was so, was too great for words.

"Heaven be praised!" I heard him mutter. Then lifting my beautiful,
unconscious burden in my arms, I carried her upstairs to her room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Can I explain, can anyone explain, the mysterious vagaries of atavism? I
only know that there are amongst us, rare instances fortunately, but
existent nevertheless--men with the souls of beasts. They may be
cognisant of the fact or otherwise. In the case of Sir Alister I feel
sure it was the latter. He had probably no more idea than I what
far-reaching, evil strain it was that came out in his blood and turned
him, every seven years, practically into a vampire.




V

THE KISS


The quiet of the deserted building incircled the little, glowing room as
the velvet incircles the jewel in its case. Occasionally faint sounds
came from the distance--the movements of cleaners at work, a raised
voice, the slamming of a door.

The man sat at his desk, as he had sat through the busy day, but he had
turned sideways in his seat, the better to regard the other occupant of
the room.

She was not beautiful--had no need to be. Her call to him had been the
saner call of mind to mind. That he desired, besides, the passing
benediction of her hands, the fragrance of her corn-gold hair, the sight
of her slenderness: this she had guessed and gloried in. Till now, he
had touched her physical self neither in word nor deed. To-night, she
knew, the barriers would be down; to-night they would kiss.

Her quiet eyes, held by his during the spell that had bound them
speechless, did not flinch at the breaking of it.

"The Lord made the world and then He made this rotten old office," the
man said quietly. "Into it He put you--and me. What, before that day,
has gone to the making and marring of me, and the making and perfecting
of you, is not to the point. It is enough that we have realised, heart,
and soul, and body, that you are mine and I am yours."

"Yes," she said.

He fell silent again, his eyes on her hungrily. She felt them and longed
for his touch. But there came only his voice.

"I want you. The first moment I saw you I wanted you. I thought then
that, whatever the cost, I would have you. That was in the early days of
our talks here--before you made it so courageously clear to me that it
would never be possible for you to ignore my marriage and come to me.
That is still so, isn't it?"

She moved slightly, like a dreamer in pain, as again she faced the creed
she had hated through many a sleepless night.

"It is so," she agreed. "And because it is so, you are going away
to-morrow."

"Yes."

They looked at each other across the foot or two of intervening space.
It was a look to bridge death with. But even beneath their suffering,
her eyes voiced the tremulous waiting of her lips.

At last he found words.

"You are the most wonderful woman in the world--the pluckiest, the most
completely understanding; you have the widest charity. I suppose I ought
to thank you for it all; I can't--that's not my way. I have always
demanded of you, demanded enormously, and received my measure pressed
down and running over. Now I am going to ask this last thing of you:
will you, of your goodness, go away--upstairs, anywhere--and come back
in ten minutes' time? By then I shall have cleared out."

She looked at him almost incredulously, lips parted. Suddenly she seemed
a child.

"You--I----" she stammered. Then rising to her feet, with a superb
simplicity: "But, you must kiss me before you go. You must! You--simply
_must_."

For the space of a flaming moment it seemed that in one stride he would
have crossed to her side, caught and held her.

"For God's sake----!" he muttered, in almost ludicrous fear of himself.
Then, with a big effort, he regained his self-control.

"Listen," he said hoarsely. "I want to kiss you so much that I daren't
even get to my feet. Do you understand what that means? Think of it,
just for a moment, and then realise that _I am not going to kiss you_.
And I have kissed many women in my time, too, and shall kiss more, no
doubt."

"But it's not because of that----?"

"That I'm holding back? No. Neither is it because I funk the torture of
kissing you once and letting you go. It's because I'm afraid--for
_you_."

"For me?"

"Listen. You have unfolded your beliefs to me and, though I don't hold
them--don't attempt to live up to your lights--the realisation of them
has given me a reverence for you that you don't dream of. I have put you
in a shrine and knelt to you; every time you have sat in that chair and
talked with me, I have worshipped you."

"It would not alter--all that," the girl said faintly, "if you kissed
me."

"I don't believe that; neither do you--no, you don't! In your heart of
hearts you admit that a woman like you is not kissed for the first and
last time by a man like me. Suppose I kissed you now? I should awaken
something in you as yet half asleep. You're young and pulsing with life,
and there are--thank Heaven!--few layers of that damnable young-girl
shyness over you. The world would call you primitive, I suppose."

"But I don't----"

"Oh, Lord, you must see it's all or nothing! You surely understand that
after I had left you you would not go against your morality, perhaps,
but you would adjust it, in spite of yourself, to meet your desires! I
cannot--safely--kiss you."

"But you are going away for good!"

"For good! Child, do you think my going will be your safeguard? If you
wanted me so much that you came to think it was right and good to want
me, wouldn't you find me, send for me, call for me? And I should come.
God! I can see the look in your eyes now, when the want had been
satisfied, and you could not drug your creed any more."

Her breath came in a long sigh. Then she tried to speak; tried again.

"It is so, isn't it?" he asked.

She nodded. Speech was too difficult. With the movement a strand of the
corn-gold hair came tumbling down the side of her face.

"Then, that being the case," said the man, with infinite gentleness, his
eyes on the little, tumbling lock, "I shall not attempt so much as to
touch your hand before you leave the room."

At the door she turned.

"Tell me once again," she said. "You _want_ to kiss me?"

He gripped the arms of his chair; from where she stood, she could see
the veins standing out on his hands.

"I want to kiss you," he said fiercely. "I want to kiss you. If there
were any way of cutting off to-morrow--all the to-morrows--with the
danger they hold for us--I would kiss you. I would kiss you, and kiss
you, and kiss you!"


II

Where her feet took her during the thousand, thousand years that was his
going she could never afterwards say; but she found herself at last at
the top of the great building, at an open window, leaning out, with the
rain beating into her eyes.

Far below her the lights wavered and later she remembered that echoes of
a far-off tumult had reached her as she sat. But her ears held only the
memory of a man's footsteps--the eager tread that had never lingered so
much as a second's space on its way to her; that had often stumbled
slightly on the threshold of her presence; that she had heard and
welcomed in her dreams; that would not come again.

The raindrops lay like tears upon her face.

She brushed them aside, and, rising, put up her hands to feel the wet
lying heavy on her hair. The coldness of her limbs surprised her
faintly. Downstairs she went again, the echoes mocking every step.

She closed the door of the room behind her and idly cleared a scrap of
paper from a chair. Mechanically her hands went to the litter on his
desk and she had straightened it all before she realised that there was
no longer any need. To-morrow would bring a voice she did not know;
would usher a stranger into her room to take her measure from behind a
barrier of formality. For the rest there would be work, and food, and
sleep.

These things would make life--life that had been love.

She put on her hat and coat. The room seemed smaller somehow and
shabbier. The shaded lights that had invited, now merely irritated; the
whimsical disorder of books and papers spoke only of an uncompleted
task. Gone was the glamour and the promise and the good comradeship. He
had taken them all. She faced to-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow
empty-handed--in her heart the memory of words that had seared and
healed in a breath, and the dead dream of a kiss. Her throat ached with
the pain of it.

And then suddenly she heard him coming back!

She stiffened. For one instant, mind and body, she was rigid with the
sheer wonder of it. Then, as the atmosphere of the room surged back,
tense with vitality, her mind leapt forward in welcome. He was coming
back, coming back! The words hammered themselves out to the rhythm of
the eager tread that never lingered so much as a second's space on its
way to her, that stumbled slightly on the threshold of her presence.

By some queer, reflex twist of memory, her hands brushed imaginary
raindrops from her face and strayed uncertainly to where the wet had
lain on her hair.

The door opened and closed behind him.

"I've come back. I've come back to kiss you. Dear--_dear_!"

Her outflung hand checked him in his stride towards her. Words came
stammering to her lips.

"Why--but--this isn't--I don't understand! All you said--it was true,
surely? It was cruel of you to make me know it was true and then come
back!"

"Let me kiss you--let me, let me!" He was overwhelming her, ignoring her
resistance. "I must kiss you, I must kiss you." He said it again and
again.

"No, no, you shan't--you can't play with me! You said you were afraid
for me, and you made me afraid, too--of my weakness--of the danger--of
my longing for you----"

"Let me kiss you! Yes, you shall let me; you _shall_ let me." His arms
held her, his face touched hers.

"Aren't you afraid any more? Has a miracle happened--may we kiss in
spite of to-morrow?"

Inch by inch she was relaxing. All thought was slipping away into a
great white light that held no to-morrows, nor any fear of them, nor of
herself, nor of anything. The light crept to her feet, rose to her
heart, her head. Through the radiance came his words.

"Yes, a miracle. Oh, my dear--my little child! I've come back to kiss
you, little child."

"Kiss me, then," she said against his lips.


III

Hazily she was aware that he had released her; that she had raised her
head; that against the rough tweed of his shoulder there lay a long,
corn-gold hair.

She laughed shakily and her hand went up to remove it; but he caught her
fingers and held them to his face. And with the movement and his look
there came over her in a wave the shame of her surrender, a shame that
was yet a glory, a diadem of pride. She turned blindly away.

"Please," she heard herself saying, "let me go now. I want to be alone.
I want to--please don't tell me to-night. To-morrow----"

She was at the door, groping for the handle. Behind her she heard his
voice; it was very tender.

"I shall always kneel to you--in your shrine."

Then she was outside, and the chilly passages were cooling her burning
face. She had left him in the room behind her; and she knew he would
wait there long enough to allow her to leave the building. Almost
immediately, it seemed, she was downstairs in the hall, had reached the
entrance.

She confronted a group of white-faced, silent men.

"Why, is anything the matter? What has happened? O'Dell?"

The porter stood forward. He cleared his throat twice, but for all that,
his words were barely audible.

"Yes, Miss Carryll. Good-night, miss. You'd best be going on, miss, if
you'll excuse----"

Behind O'Dell stood a policeman; behind him again, a grave-eyed man
stooped to an unusual task. It arrested her attention like the flash of
red danger.

"Why is the door of your room being locked, O'Dell?" She knew her
curiosity was indecent, but some powerful premonition was stirring in
her, and she could not pass on. "Has there been an accident? Who is in
there?"

Then, almost under her feet, she saw a dark pool lying sluggishly
against the tiles; nearer the door another--on the pavement outside
another--and yet another. She gasped, drew back, felt horribly sick;
and, as she turned, she caught O'Dell's muttered aside to the policeman.

"Young lady's 'is seccereterry--must be the last that seen 'im alive.
All told, 'tain't more'n 'arf-an-'our since 'e left. 'Good-night,
O'Dell,' sez 'e. 'Miss Carryll's still working--don't lock 'er in,' sez
'e. Would 'ave 'is joke. Must 'ave gone round the corner an' slap inter
the car. Wish to God the amberlance----"

Her cry cut into his words as she flung herself forward. Her fingers
wrenched at the key of the locked door and turned it, in spite of the
detaining hands that seemed light as leaves upon her shoulder, and as
easily shaken off. Unhearing, unheeding, she forced her way into the
glare of electric light flooding the little room--beating down on to the
table and its sheeted burden. Before she reached it, knowledge had
dropped upon her like a mantle.

Her face was grey as the one from which she drew the merciful coverings,
but her eyes went fearlessly to that which she sought.

Against the rough tweed of the shoulder lay a long, corn-gold hair.




VI

THE GOTH


Young Cargill smiled as Mrs. Lardner finished her account.

"And do you really think that the fact that the poor chap was drowned
had anything to do with it?" he asked. "Why, you admit yourself that he
was known to have been drinking just before he fell out of his boat!"

"You may say what you like," returned his hostess impressively, "but
since first we came to live at Tryn yr Wylfa only four people besides
poor Roberts have defied the Fates, and each of them was drowned within
the year.

"They were all tourists," she added with something suspiciously like
satisfaction.

"I am not a superstitious man myself," supplemented the Major. "But you
can't get away from the facts, you know, Cargill."

Cargill said no more. He perceived that they had lived long enough in
retirement in the little Welsh village to have acquired a pride in its
legend.

The legend and the mountains are the two attractions of Tryn yr
Wylfa--the official guidebook devotes an equal amount of space to each.
It will tell you that the bay, across which the quarry's tramp steamers
now sail, was once dry land on which stood a village. Deep in the water
the remains of this village can still be seen in clear weather. But
whosoever dares to look upon them will be drowned within the year. A
local publication gives full details of those who have looked--and
perished.

The legend had received an unexpected boom in the drowning of Roberts,
which had just occurred. Roberts was a fisherman who had recently come
from the South. One calm day in February he had rowed out into the bay
in fulfilment of a drunken boast. He was drowned three days before
Midsummer.

After dinner young Cargill forgot about it. He forgot almost everything
except Betty Lardner. But, oddly enough, as he walked back to the hotel
it was just Betty Lardner who made him think again of the legend. He was
in love, and, being very young, wanted to do something insanely heroic.
To defy the Fates by looking on the sunken village was an obvious outlet
for heroism.

He must have thought a good deal about it before he fell asleep, for he
remembered his resolution on the following morning.

After breakfast he sauntered along the brief strip of asphalt which the
villagers believe to be a promenade. He was not actually thinking of the
legend; to be precise, he was thinking of Betty Lardner, but he was
suddenly reminded of it by a boatman pressing him for his custom.

"Yes," he said abruptly. "I will hire your boat if you will row me out
to the sunken village. I want to look at it."

The Welshman eyed him suspiciously, perceived that he was not joking,
and shook his head.

"Come," persisted Cargill, "I will make it a sovereign if you care to do
it."

"Thank you, but indeed, no, sir," replied the Welshman. "Not if it wass
a hundred sofereigns!"

"Surely you are not afraid?"

"It iss not fit," retorted the Welshman, turning on his heel.

It was probably this opposition that made young Cargill decide that it
would be really worth while to defy the legend.

He did not approach the only other boatman. He considered the question
of swimming. The knowledge that the distance there and back was nearly
five miles did not render the feat impossible, for he was a champion
swimmer.

But he soon thought of a better way. He went back to the hotel and
sought out Bissett. Bissett was a fellow member of the Middle Temple, as
contentedly briefless as himself. And Bissett possessed a motor-boat.

Bissett was not exactly keen on the prospect.

"Don't you think it is rather a silly thing to do?" he reasoned. "Of
course it's all rot in a way--it must be. But isn't it just as well to
treat that sort of thing with respect?"

Eventually he agreed to take the motor-boat to within a few hundred
yards of the spot. They would tow a dinghy, in which young Cargill could
finish the journey.

It took young Cargill half-an-hour to find the spot. But he did find it,
and he did look upon, and actually see, all that remained of the sunken
village.

He felt vaguely ashamed of himself when he returned to dry land. He
noticed that several of the villagers gave him unfriendly glances; and
he resolved that he would say nothing of the matter to the Lardners.

They were having tea on the lawn when he dropped in. He thought that
Mrs. Lardner's welcome was a trifle chilly. After tea Betty executed a
quite deliberate manœuvre to avoid having him for a partner at tennis.
But he ran her to earth later, when they were picking up the balls.

"How _could_ you?" was all she said.

"I--I didn't know you knew," he stammered weakly.

"Of course everybody knows! It was all over the village before you
returned.

"Can't you see what that legend meant to us?" she went on. "It was a
thing of beauty. And now you have spoilt it. It's like burning down the
trees of the Fairy Glen. You--you _Goth_!"

"But suppose I am drowned before the year is out--like Roberts?" he
suggested jocularly.

"Then I will forgive you," she said. And to Cargill it sounded exactly
as if she meant what she said.

A few days later he returned to town. For six months he thought little
about the legend. Then he was reminded of it.

He had been spending a week-end at Brighton. On the return journey he
had a first-class smoker in the rear of the train to himself. Towards
the end of the hour he dozed and dreamt of the day he had looked on the
sunken village. He was awakened when the train made its usual stop on
the bridge outside Victoria.

It had been a pleasant dream, and he was still trying to preserve the
illusion when his eye fell lazily on the window, and he noticed that
there was a dense fog.

"Bit rough on the legend that I happened to be a Londoner!" he mused.
"It isn't easy to drown a man in town!"

He stood up with the object of removing his dressing-case from the rack.
But before he reached it there was the shriek of a whistle, a violent
shock, and he was hurled heavily into the opposite seat.

It was not a collision in the newspaper sense of the word. No one was
hurt. A local train, creeping along at four miles an hour, had simply
missed its signal in the fog and bumped the Brighton train.

Young Cargill, in common with most other passengers put his head out of
the window. He saw nothing--except the parapet of the bridge.

"By God!" he muttered. "If that other train had been going a little
faster----"

He could just hear the river gurgling beneath him.

He had got over his fright by the time he reached Victoria.

"Just a common-place accident," he assured himself, as he drove in a
taxi-cab to his chambers. "That's the worst of it! If I happened to be
drowned in the ordinary way they'd swear it was the legend. I suppose,
for that reason, I had better not take any risks. Anyhow, I needn't go
near the sea until the year is out!"

The superstitious would doubtless affirm that the Fates had sent him one
warning and, angered at his refusal to accept it, had determined to
drive home the lesson of his own impotence. For when he arrived at his
chambers he found a cablegram from Paris awaiting him.

"Hullo, this must be from Uncle Peter!" he exclaimed, as he tore open
the envelope.

"_Fear uncle dying. Come at once.--Machell._"

Machell was the elder Cargill's secretary, and young Cargill was the old
man's heir.

It was not until he was in the boat-train that he realised that he was
about to cross the sea.

It was a coincidence--an odd coincidence. When the ship tossed in an
unusually rough crossing he was prepared to admit to himself that it was
an uncanny coincidence.

He stayed a week in Paris for his uncle's funeral. When he made the
return journey the Channel was like the proverbial mill pond. But it was
not until the ship had actually put into Dover that he laughed at the
failure of the Fates to take the opportunity to drown him.

He laughed, to be exact, as he was stepping down the gangway. At the end
of the gangway the fold of the rug which he was carrying on his arm,
caught in the railings. He turned sharply to free it and stepping back,
cannoned into an officer of the dock. It threw him off his balance on
the edge of the dockside.

Even if the official had not grabbed him, it is highly probable that he
could have saved himself from falling into the water, because the
gangway railing was in easy reach; and if you remember that he was a
champion swimmer, you will agree that it is still more probable that he
would not have been drowned, even if he had fallen.

But the incident made its impression. His thoughts reverted to it
constantly during the next few days. Then he told himself that his
attendance at the last rites of his uncle had made him morbid, and was
more or less successful in dismissing the affair from his mind.

He had many friends in common with the Lardners. Early in February he
was invited for a week's hunting to a house at which Betty Lardner was
also a guest.

She had not forgotten. She did her best to avoid him, and succeeded
remarkably well, in spite of the fact that their hostess, knowing
something of young Cargill's feelings, made several efforts to throw
them together.

One day at the end of the hunt he came alongside of her and they walked
their horses home together. When he was sure that they were out of
earshot he asked:

"You haven't forgiven me yet?"

"You know the conditions," she replied banteringly.

"You leave me no alternative to suicide," he protested.

"That would be cheating," she said. "You must be drowned honestly, or
it's no good."

Then he made a foolish reply. He thought her humour forced and it
annoyed him. Remember that he was exasperated. He had looked forward to
meeting her, and now she was treating him with studied coldness over
what still seemed to him a comparatively trifling matter.

"I am afraid," he said, "that that is hardly likely to occur. The fact
of my being a townsman instead of a drunken boatman doesn't give your
legend a fair chance!"

Less than an hour afterwards he was having his bath before dressing for
dinner. The water was deliciously hot, and the room was full of steam.
As he lay in the bath a drowsiness stole over him. Enjoying the keen
physical pleasure of it, he thought what a wholly delightful thing was a
hot bath after a day's hard hunting. His mind, bordering on sleep, dwelt
lazily on hot baths in general. And then with a startling suddenness
came the thought that, before now, men had been drowned in their baths!

With a shock he realised that he had almost fallen asleep. He tried to
rouse himself, but a faintness had seized him. That steam--he could not
breathe! He was certain he was going to faint.

With a desperate effort of the will he hurled himself out of the bath
and threw open the window.

It must have been the bath episode that first aroused the sensation of
positive fear in Cargill. For it was almost a month later when he
surprised the secretary of that swimming club of which he was the main
pillar by his refusal to take part in any events for the coming season.

He was beginning to take precautions.

Late one night, when taxi-cabs were scarce, he found that his quickest
way to reach home would be by means of one of the tubes. He was in the
descending lift when he suddenly remembered that that particular tube
ran beneath the river. Suppose an accident should occur--a leakage!
After all such a thing was within the bounds of possibility. Instantly
there rose before him the vision of a black torrent roaring through the
tunnel.

Without waiting for the lift to ascend he rushed to the staircase, and
sweating with terror gained the street and bribed a loafer to find him a
cab.

He made an effort to take himself seriously in hand after that. More
than one acquaintance had lately told him that he was looking "nervy."
In the last few weeks his sane and normal self seemed to have shrunk
within him. But it was still capable of asserting itself under
favourable conditions. It would talk aloud to the rest of him as if to a
separate individual.

"Look here, old man, this superstitious nonsense is becoming an
obsession to you," it said one fine April morning. "Yes, I mean what I
say--an obsession! You must pull yourself together or you'll go stark
mad, and then you'll probably go and throw yourself over the Embankment.
That legend is all bosh! You're in the twentieth century, and you're not
a drunken fisherman----"

"Hullo, young Cargill!"

The door burst open and Stranack, oozing health and sanity, glared at
him.

"Jove! What a wreck you look!" continued Stranack. "You've been
frousting too much. I'm glad I came. The car's outside, and we'll run
down to Kingston, take a skiff and pull up to Molesey."

The river! Young Cargill felt the blood singing in his ears.

"I'm afraid I can't manage it. I--I've got an appointment this
afternoon," he stammered.

Stranack perceived that he was lying, and wondered. For a few minutes
he gossiped, while young Cargill was repeating to himself:

"You must pull yourself together. It's becoming an obsession. You must
pull yourself together."

He was vaguely conscious that Stranack was about to depart. Stranack was
already in the doorway. His chance of killing the obsession was slipping
from him! A special effort and then:

"Stop!" cried Cargill. "I--I'll come with you, Stranack."

Oddly enough, he felt much better when they were actually on the river.
He had never been afraid of water, as such. And the familiar scenery,
together with the wholesome exercise of sculling, acted as a tonic to
his nerves.

They pulled above Molesey lock. When they were returning, Stranack said:

"You'll take her through the lock, won't you?"

It was a needless remark, and if Stranack had not made it all might have
been well. As a fact, it set Cargill asking himself why he should not
take her through the lock. He was admitted to be a much better boatman
than Stranack, and everyone knew that it required a certain amount of
skill to manage a lock properly. Locks were dangerous if you played the
fool. Before now people had been drowned in locks.

The rest was inevitable. He lost his head as the lower gates swung open,
and broke the rule of the river by pushing out in front of a launch. The
launch was already under way, and young Cargill trying to avoid it
better, thrust with his boat-hook at the side of the lock. The thrust
was nervous and ill-calculated, and the next instant the skiff had
blundered under the bows of the launch.

It happened very quickly. The skiff was forced, broadside on, against
the lock gates, and was splintered like firewood. Cargill fell
backwards, struck his head heavily against the gates--and sank.

He returned to consciousness in the lock-keeper's lodge. He had been
under water a dangerously long time before Stranack, who had suffered no
more than a wetting, had found him. It had been touch and go for his
life, but artificial respiration had succeeded.

He soon went to pieces after that.

From one of the windows of his chambers the river was just visible. One
morning he deliberately pulled the blind down. The action was important.
It signified that he had definitely given up pretending that he had the
power of shaking off the obsession.

But if he could not shake it off, he could at least keep it temporarily
at bay. He started a guerilla campaign against the obsession with the
aid of the brandy bottle. He was rarely drunk, and as rarely sober.

He was sober the day he was compelled to call on an aunt who lived in
the still prosperous outskirts of Paddington. It was one of his good
days and, in spite of his sobriety, he had himself in very good control
when he left his aunt.

In his search for a cab it became necessary for him to cross the canal.
On the bridge he paused and, gripping the parapet, made a surprise
attack upon his enemy.

Some children, playing on the tow path, helped him considerably. Their
delightful sanity in the presence of the water was worth more to him
than the brandy. He was positively winning the battle, when one of the
children fell into the water.

For an instant he hesitated. Then, as on the night of the Tube episode,
panic seized him. The next instant the man who was probably the best
amateur swimmer in England, was running with all his might away from the
canal.

When he reached his chambers he waited, with the assistance of the
brandy, until his man brought him the last edition of the evening paper.
A tiny paragraph on the back sheet told him of the tragedy.

An hour later his man found him face downwards on the hearthrug and,
wrongly attributing his condition wholly to the brandy, put him to bed.

He was in bed about three weeks. The doctor, who was also a personal
friend, was shrewd enough to suspect that the brandy was the effect,
rather than the cause of the nerve trouble.

About the first week in June Cargill was allowed to get up.

"You've got to go away," said the doctor one morning. "You are probably
aware that your nerves have gone to pieces. The sea is the place for
you!"

The gasp that followed was scarcely audible, and the doctor missed it.

"You went to Tryn yr Wylfa about this time last year," continued the
doctor. "Go there again! Go for long walks on the mountains, and put up
at a temperance hotel."

He went to Tryn yr Wylfa.

The train journey of six hours knocked him up for another week. By the
time he was strong enough for the promenade it was the fourteenth of
June. He noticed the date on the hotel calendar, and realised that the
Fates had another ten days in which to drown him.

He did not call on the Lardners. He felt that he couldn't--after the
canal episode. Four of the ten days had passed before Betty Lardner ran
across him on the promenade.

She noticed at once the change in him, and was kinder than she had ever
been before.

"Next Saturday," he said, "is the anniversary!"

For answer she smiled at him, and he might have smiled back if he had
not remembered the canal.

She met him each morning after that, so that she was with him on the day
when he made his atonement.

There had been a violent storm in the early morning. It had driven one
of the quarry steamers on to the long sand-bank that lies submerged
between Tryn yr Wylfa and Puffin Island. The gale still lasted, and the
steamer was in momentary danger of becoming a complete wreck.

There is no lifeboat service at Tryn yr Wylfa. It was impossible to
launch an ordinary boat in such a sea.

Colonel Denbigh, the owner of the quarry and local magnate, who had been
superintending what feeble efforts had been made to effect a rescue,
answered gloomily when Betty Lardner asked him if there were any hope.

"It's a terrible thing," he jerked. "First time there has been a wreck
hereabouts. It's hopeless trying to launch a boat----"

"Suppose a fellow were to swim out to the wreck with a life-line in
tow?"

It was young Cargill who spoke.

The Colonel glared at him contemptuously.

"He would need to be a pretty fine swimmer," he returned.

"I don't want to blow my own trumpet, but I am considered to be one of
the best amateur swimmers in the country," replied Cargill calmly. "If
you will tell your men to get the line ready, I will borrow a bathing
suit from somewhere."

They both stared at him in amazement.

"But you are still an invalid," cried Betty Lardner. "You----"

She stopped short and regarded him with fresh wonder. Somehow he no
longer looked an invalid.

Mechanically she walked by his side to the little bathing office.
Suddenly she clutched his arm.

"Jack," she said, "have you forgotten the--the legend?"

"Betty," he replied, "have you forgotten the crew?"

While he was undressing the attendant asked him some trivial question.
He did not hear the man. His thoughts were far away. He was thinking of
a group of children playing on the bank of a canal.

To the accompaniment of the Colonel's protests they fixed a belt on him,
to which was attached the life-line.

He walked along the sloping wooden projection that is used as a landing
stage for pleasure skiffs, walked until the water splashed over him.
Then he dived into the boiling surf.

Thus it was that he earned Betty Lardner's forgiveness.




VII

THE LAST ASCENT


The extraordinary rapidity with which a successful airman may achieve
fame was well shown in the case of my friend, Radcliffe Thorpe. One week
known merely to a few friends as a clever young engineer, the next his
name was on the lips of the civilised world. His first success was
followed by a series of remarkable feats, of which his flight above the
Atlantic, his race with the torpedo-boat-destroyers across the North
Sea, and his sensational display during the military manœuvres on
Salisbury Plain, impressed his name and personality firmly upon the
fickle mind of the public, and explains the tremendous excitement caused
by his inexplicable disappearance during the great aviation meeting at
Attercliffe, near London, towards the end of the summer.

Few people, I suppose, have forgotten the facts. For some time
previously he had been devoting himself more especially to ascending to
as great a height as possible. He held all the records for height, and
it was known that at Attercliffe he meant to endeavour to eclipse his
own achievements.

It was a lovely day, not a breath of wind stirring, not a cloud in the
sky. We saw him start. We saw him fly up and up in great sweeping
spirals. We saw him climb higher and ever higher into the azure space.
We watched him, those of us whose eyes could bear the strain, as he
dwindled to a dot and a speck, till at last he passed beyond sight.

It was a stirring thing to see a man thus storm, as it were, the walls
of Heaven and probe the very mysteries of space. I remember I felt quite
annoyed with someone who was taking a cinematograph record. It seemed
such a sordid, business-like thing to be doing at such a moment.

Presently the aeroplane came into sight again and was greeted with a
sudden roar of cheering.

"He is doing a glide down," someone cried excitedly, and though someone
else declared that a glide from such a height was unthinkable and
impossible, yet it was soon plain that the first speaker was right.

Down through unimaginable thousands of feet, straight and swift swept
the machine, making such a sweep as the eagle in its pride would never
have dared. People held their breath to watch, expecting every moment
some catastrophe. But the machine kept on an even keel, and in a few
moments I joined with the others in a wild rush to the field at a little
distance where the machine, like a mighty bird, had alighted easily and
safely.

But when we reached it we doubted our own eyes, our own sanity. There
was no sign anywhere of Radcliffe Thorpe!

No one knew what to say; we looked blankly at our neighbours, and one
man got down on his hands and knees and peered under the body of the
machine as if he suspected Radcliffe of hiding there. Then the chairman
of the meeting, Lord Fallowfield, made a curious discovery.

"Look," he said in a high, shaken voice, "the steering wheel is jammed!"

It was true. The steering wheel had been carefully fastened in one
position, and the lever controlling the planes had also been fixed so as
to hold them at the right angle for a downward glide. That was strange
enough, but in face of the mystery of Radcliffe's disappearance little
attention was paid it.

Where, then, was its pilot? That was the question that was filling
everybody's mind. He had vanished as utterly as vanishes the mist one
sees rising in the sunshine.

It was supposed he must have fallen from his seat, but as to how that
had happened, how it was that no fragment of his body or his clothing
was ever found, above all, how it was that his aeroplane had returned,
the engine cut off, the planes secured in correct position, no even
moderately plausible explanation was ever put forward.

The loss to aeronautics was felt to be severe. From childhood Radcliffe
had shown that, in addition to this, he had a marked aptitude for
drawing, usually held at the service of his profession, but now and
again exercised in producing sketches of his friends.

Among those who knew him privately he was fairly popular, though not,
perhaps, so much so as he deserved; certainly he had a way of talking
"shop" which was a trifle tiring to those who did not figure the world
as one vast engineering problem, while with women he was apt to be
brusque and short-mannered.

My surprise, then, can be imagined when, calling one afternoon on him
and having to wait a little, I had noticed lying on his desk a crayon
sketch of a woman's face. It was a very lovely face, the features almost
perfect, and yet there was about it something unearthly and spectral
that was curiously disturbing.

"Smitten at last?" I asked jestingly, and yet aware of a certain odd
discomfort.

When, he saw what I was looking at he went very pale.

"Who is it?" I asked.

"Oh, just--someone!" he answered.

He took the sketch from me, looked at it, frowned and locked it away. As
he seemed unwilling to pursue the subject, I went on to talk of the
business I had come about, and I congratulated him on his flight of the
day before in which he had broken the record for height. As I was going
he said:

"By the way, that sketch--what did you think of it?"

"Why, that you had better be careful," I answered, laughing; "or you'll
be falling from your high estate of bachelordom."

He gave so violent a start, his face expressed so much of apprehension
and dismay, that I stared at him blankly. Recovering himself with an
effort, he stammered out:

"It's not--I mean--it's an imaginary portrait."

"Then," I said, amazed in my turn, "you've a jolly sight more
imagination than anyone ever credited you with."

The incident remained in my mind. As a matter of fact, practical
Radcliffe Thorpe, absorbed in questions of strain and ease, his head
full of cylinders and wheels and ratchets and the Lord knows what else,
would have seemed to me the last man on earth to create that haunting,
strange, unearthly face, human in form, but not in expression.

It was about this time that Radcliffe began to give so much attention to
the making of very high flights. His favourite time was in the early
morning, as soon as it was light. Then in the chill dawn he would rise
and soar and wing his flight high and ever higher, up and up, till the
eye could no longer follow his ascent.

I remember he made one of these strange, solitary flights when I was
spending the week-end with him at his cottage near the Attercliffe
Aviation Grounds.

I had come down from town somewhat late the night before, and I remember
that just before we went to bed we went out for a few minutes to enjoy
the beauty of a perfect night. The moon was shining in a clear sky, not
a sound or a breath disturbed the sublime quietude; in the south one
wondrous star gleamed low on the horizon. Neither of us spoke; it was
enough to drink in the beauty of such rare perfection, and I noticed how
Radcliffe kept his eyes fixed upwards on the dark blue vault of space.

"Are you longing to be up there?" I asked him jestingly.

He started and flushed, and he then went very pale, and to my surprise I
saw that he was shivering.

"You are getting cold," I said. "We had better go in."

He nodded without answering, and, as we turned to go in, I heard quite
plainly and distinctly a low, strange laugh, a laugh full of a honeyed
sweetness that yet thrilled me with great fear.

"What's that?" I said, stopping short.

"What?" Radcliffe asked.

"Someone laughed," I said, and I stared all round and then upwards. "I
thought it came from up there," I said in a bewildered way, pointing
upwards.

He gave me an odd look and, without answering, went into the cottage. He
had said nothing of having planned any flight for the next morning; but
in the early morning, the chill and grey dawn, I was roused by the
drumming of his engine. At once I jumped up out of bed and ran to the
window.

The machine was raising itself lightly and easily from the ground. I
watched him wing his god-like way up through the still, soft air till he
was lost to view. Then, after a time, I saw him emerge again from those
immensities of space. He came down in one long majestic sweep, and
alighted in a field a little way away from the house, leaving the
aeroplane for his mechanics to fetch up presently.

"Hullo!" I greeted him. "Why didn't you tell me you were going up?"

As I spoke I heard plainly and distinctly, as plainly as ever I heard
anything in my life, that low, strange laugh, that I had heard before,
so silvery sweet and yet somehow so horrible.

"What's that?" I said, stopping short and staring blankly upwards, for,
absurd though it seems, that weird sound seemed to come floating down
from an infinite height above us.

"Not high enough," he muttered like a man in an ecstasy. "Not high
enough yet."

He walked away from me then without another word. When I entered the
cottage he was seated at the table sketching a woman's face--the same
face I had seen in that other sketch of his, spectral, unreal, and
lovely.

"What on earth----?" I began.

"Nothing on earth," he answered in a strange voice. Then he laughed and
jumped up, and tore his sketch across.

He seemed quite his old self again, chatty and pleasant, and with his
old passion for talking "shop." He launched into a long explanation of
some scheme he had in mind for securing automatic balancing.

I never told anyone about that strange, mocking laugh, in fact, I had
almost forgotten the incident altogether when something brought every
detail back to my memory. I had a letter from a person who signed
himself "George Barnes."

Barnes, it seemed, was the operator who had taken the pictures of that
last ascent, and as he understood I had been Mr. Thorpe's greatest
friend, he wanted to see me. Certain expressions in the letter aroused
my curiosity. I replied. He asked for an appointment at a time that was
not very convenient, and finally I arranged to call at his house one
evening.

It was one of those smart little six-room villas of which so many have
been put up in the London suburbs of late. Barnes was buying it on the
instalment system, and I quite won his heart by complimenting him on it.
But for that, I doubt if anything would have come of my visit, for he
was plainly nervous and ill at ease and very repentant of ever having
said anything. But after my compliment to the house we got on better.

"It's on my mind," he said; "I shan't be easy till someone else knows."

We were in the front room where a good fire was burning--in my honour, I
guessed, for the apartment had not the air of being much used. On the
table were some photographs. Barnes showed them me. They were
enlargements from those he had taken of poor Radcliffe's last ascent.

"They've been shown all over the world," he said. "Millions of people
have seen them."

"Well?" I said.

"But there's one no one has seen--no one except me."

He produced another print and gave it to me. I glanced at it. It seemed
much like the others, having been apparently one of the last of the
series, taken when the aeroplane was at a great height. The only thing
in which it differed from the others was that it seemed a trifle
blurred.

"A poor one," I said; "it's misty."

"Look at the mist," he said.

I did so. Slowly, very slowly, I began to see that that misty appearance
had a shape, a form. Even as I looked I saw the features of a human
countenance--and yet not human either, so spectral was it, so unreal and
strange. I felt the blood run cold in my veins and the hair bristle on
the scalp of my head, for I recognised beyond all doubt that this face
on the photograph was the same as that Radcliffe had sketched. The
resemblance was absolute, no one who had seen the one could mistake the
other.

"You see it?" Barnes muttered, and his face was almost as pale as mine.

"There's a woman," I stammered, "a woman floating in the air by his
side. Her arms are held out to him."

"Yes," Barnes said. "Who was she?"

The print slipped from my hands and fluttered to the ground. Barnes
picked it up and put it in the fire. Was it fancy or, as it flared up,
and burnt and was consumed, did I really hear a faint laugh floating
downwards from the upper air?

"I destroyed the negative," Barnes said, "and I told my boss something
had gone wrong with it. No one has seen that photograph but you and me,
and now no one ever will."




VIII

THE TERROR BY NIGHT


Maynard disincumbered himself from his fishing-creel, stabbed the butt
of his rod into the turf, and settled down in the heather to fill a
pipe. All round him stretched the undulating moor, purple in the late
summer sunlight. To the southward, low down, a faint haze told where the
sea lay. The stream at his feet sang its queer, crooning moor-song as it
rambled onward, chuckling to meet a bed of pebbles somewhere out of
sight, whispering mysteriously to the rushes that fringed its banks of
peat, deepening to a sudden contralto as it poured over granite boulders
into a scum-flecked pool below.

For a long time the man sat smoking. Occasionally he turned his head to
watch with keen eyes the fretful movements of a fly hovering above the
water. Then a sudden dimple in the smooth surface of the stream arrested
his attention. A few concentric ripples widened, travelled towards him,
and were absorbed in the current. His lips curved into a little smile
and he reached for his rod. In the clear water he could see the origin
of the ripples; a small trout, unconscious of his presence, was waiting
in its hover for the next tit-bit to float downstream. Presently it rose
again.

"The odds are ten to one in your favour," said the man. "Let's see!"

He dropped on one knee and the cast leapt out in feathery coils. Once,
twice it swished; the third time it alighted like thistledown on the
surface. There was a tiny splash, a laugh, and the little greenheart
rod flicked a trout high over his head. It was the merest
baby--half-an-ounce, perhaps--and it fell from the hook into the herbage
some yards from the stream.

"Little ass!" said Maynard. "That was meant for your big brother."

He recovered his cast and began to look for his victim. Without avail he
searched the heather, and as the fateful seconds sped, at last laid down
his rod and dropped on hands and knees to probe among the grass-stems.

For a while he hunted in vain, then the sunlight showed a golden sheen
among some stones. Maynard gave a grunt of relief, but as his hand
closed round it a tiny flutter passed through the fingerling; it gave a
final gasp and was still. Knitting his brows in almost comical vexation,
he hastened to restore it to the stream, holding it by the tail and
striving to impart a life-like wriggle to its limpness.

"Buck up, old thing!" he murmured encouragingly. "Oh, buck up! You're
all right, really you are!"

But the "old thing" was all wrong. In fact, it was dead.

Standing in the wet shingle, Maynard regarded the speckled atom as it
lay in the palm of his hand.

"A matter of seconds, my son. One instant in all eternity would have
made just the difference between life and death to you. And the high
gods denied it you!"

On the opposite side of the stream, set back about thirty paces from the
brink, stood a granite boulder. It was as high as a man's chest, roughly
cubical in shape; but the weather and clinging moss had rounded its
edges, and in places segments had crumbled away, giving foothold to
clumps of fern and starry moor-flowers. On three sides the surrounding
ground rose steeply, forming an irregular horseshoe mound that opened to
the west. Perhaps it was the queer amphitheatrical effect of this
setting that connected up some whimsical train of thought in Maynard's
brain.

"It would seem as if the gods had claimed you," he mused, still holding
the corpse. "You shall be a sacrifice--a burnt sacrifice to the God of
Waste Places."

He laughed at the conceit, half-ashamed of his own childishness, and
crossing the stream by some boulders, he brushed away the earth and weed
from the top of the great stone. Then he retraced his steps and gathered
a handful of bleached twigs that the winter floods had left stranded
along the margin of the stream. These he arranged methodically on the
cleared space; on the top of the tiny pyre he placed the troutlet.

"There!" he said, and smiling gravely struck a match. A faint column of
smoke curled up into the still air, and as he spoke the lower rim of the
setting sun met the edge of the moor. The evening seemed suddenly to
become incredibly still, even the voice of the stream ceasing to be a
sound distinct. A wagtail bobbing in the shallows fled into the waste.
Overhead the smoke trembled upwards, a faint stain against a cloudless
sky. The stillness seemed almost acute. It was as if the moor were
waiting, and holding its breath while it waited. Then the twigs upon his
altar crackled, and the pale flames blazed up. The man stepped back with
artistic appreciation of the effect.

"To be really impressive, there ought to be more smoke," he continued.

Round the base of the stone were clumps of small flowers. They were
crimson in colour and had thick, fleshy leaves. Hastily, he snatched a
handful and piled it on the fire. The smoke darkened and rose in a thick
column; there was a curious pungency in the air.

Far off the church-bell in some unseen hamlet struck the hour. The
distant sound, coming from the world of men and every-day affairs,
seemed to break the spell. An ousel fluttered across the stream and
dabbled in a puddle among some stones. Rabbits began to show themselves
and frisk with lengthened shadows in the clear spaces. Maynard looked at
his watch, half-mindful of a train to be caught somewhere miles away,
and then, held by the peace of running water, stretched himself against
the sloping ground.

The glowing world seemed peopled by tiny folk, living out their timid,
inscrutable lives around him. A water-rat, passing bright-eyed upon his
lawful occasion, paused on the border of the stream to consider the
stranger, and was lost to view. A stagnant pool among some reeds caught
the reflection of the sunset and changed on the instant into raw gold.

Maynard plucked a grass stem and chewed it reflectively, staring out
across the purple moor and lazily watching the western sky turn from
glory to glory. Over his head the smoke of the sacrifice still curled
and eddied upwards. Then a sudden sound sent him on to one elbow--the
thud of an approaching horse's hoofs.

"Moor ponies!" he muttered, and, rising, stood expectant beside his
smoking altar.

Then he heard the sudden jingle of a bit, and presently a horse and
rider climbed into view against the pure sky. A young girl, breeched,
booted and spurred like a boy, drew rein, and sat looking down into the
hollow.

For a moment neither spoke; then Maynard acknowledged her presence by
raising his tweed hat. She gave a little nod.

"I thought it was somebody swaling--burning the heather." She considered
the embers on the stone, and then her grey eyes travelled back to the
spare, tweed-clad figure beside it.

He smiled in his slow way--a rather attractive smile.

"No. I've just concluded some pagan rites in connection with a small
trout!" He nodded gravely at the stone. "That was a burnt sacrifice."
With whimsical seriousness he told her of the trout's demise and high
destiny.

For a moment she looked doubtful; but the inflection of breeding in his
voice, the wholesome, lean face and humorous eyes, reassured her. A
smile hovered about the corners of her mouth.

"Oh, is that it? I wondered ..."

She gathered the reins and turned her horse's head.

"Forgive me if I dragged you out of your way," said Maynard, never swift
to conventionality, but touched by the tired shadows in her eyes. The
faint droop of her mouth, too, betrayed intense fatigue. "You look
fagged. I don't want to be a nuisance or bore you, but I wish you'd let
me offer you a sandwich. I've some milk here, too."

The girl looked round the ragged moor, brooding in the twilight, and
half hesitated. Then she forced a wan little smile.

"I am tired, and hungry, too. Have you enough for us both?"

"Lots!" said Maynard. To himself he added: "And what's more, my child,
you'll have a little fainting affair in a few minutes, if you don't have
a feed."

"Come and rest for a minute," he continued aloud.

He spoke with pleasant, impersonal kindliness, and as he turned to his
satchel she slipped out of the saddle and came towards him, leading her
horse.

"Drink that," he said, holding out the cup of his flask. She drank with
a wry little face, and coughed. "I put a little whisky in it," he
explained. "You needed it."

She thanked him and sat down with the bridle linked over her arm. The
colour crept back into her cheeks. Maynard produced a packet of
sandwiches and a pasty.

"I've been mooning about the moor all the afternoon and lost myself
twice," she explained between frank mouthfuls. "I'm hopelessly late for
dinner, and I've still got miles to go."

"Do you know the way now?" he asked.

"Oh, yes! It won't take me long. My family are sensible, too, and don't
fuss." She looked at him, her long-lashed eyes a little serious. "But
you--how are you going to get home? It's getting late to be out on the
moor afoot."

Maynard laughed.

"Oh, I'm all right, thanks!" He sniffed the warm September night. "I
think I shall sleep here, as a matter of fact. I'm a gipsy by instinct--

    "'Give to me the life I love,
    Let the lave go by me,
    Give the jolly Heaven above----'"

He broke off, arrested by her unsmiling eyes. She was silent a moment.

"People don't as a rule sleep out--about here." The words came jerkily,
as if she were forcing a natural tone into her voice.

"No?" He was accustomed to being questioned on his unconventional mode
of life, and was prepared for the usual expostulations. She looked
abruptly towards him.

"Are you superstitious?"

He laughed and shook his head.

"I don't think so. But what has that got to do with it?"

She hesitated, flushing a little.

"There is a legend--people about here say that the moor here is haunted.
There is a Thing that hunts people to death!"

He laughed outright, wondering how old she was. Seventeen or eighteen,
perhaps. She had said her people "didn't fuss." That meant she was left
to herself to pick up all these old wives' tales.

"Really! Has anyone been caught?"

She nodded, unsmiling.

"Yes; old George Toms. He was one of Dad's tenants, a big purple-faced
man, who drank a lot and never took much exercise. They found him in a
ditch with his clothes all torn and covered with mud. He had been run to
death; there was no wound on his body, but his heart was broken." Her
thoughts recurred to the stone against which they leant, and his quaint
conceit. "You were rather rash to go offering burnt sacrifices about
here, don't you think? Dad says that stone is the remains of an old
Phœnician altar, too."

She was smiling now, but the seriousness lingered in her eyes.

"And I have probably invoked some terrible heathen deity--Ashtoreth, or
Pugm, or Baal! How awful!" he added, with mock gravity.

The girl rose to her feet.

"You are laughing at me. The people about here are superstitious, and I
am a Celt, too. I belong here."

He jumped up with a quick protest.

"No, I'm not laughing at you. Please don't think that! But it's a little
hard to believe in active evil when all around is so beautiful." He
helped her to mount and walked to the top of the mound at her stirrup.
"Tell me, is there any charm or incantation, in case----?" His eyes were
twinkling, but she shook her fair head soberly.

"They say iron--cold iron--is the only thing it cannot cross. But I must
go!" She held out her hand with half-shy friendliness. "Thank you for
your niceness to me." Her eyes grew suddenly wistful. "Really, though, I
don't think I should stay there if I were you. Please!"

He only laughed, however, and she moved off, shaking her impatient
horse into a canter. Maynard stood looking after her till she was
swallowed by the dusk and surrounding moor. Then, thoughtfully, he
retraced his steps to the hollow.

       *       *       *       *       *

A cloud lay across the face of the moon when Fear awoke Maynard. He
rolled on to one elbow and stared round the hollow, filled with
inexplicable dread. He was ordinarily a courageous man, and had no
nerves to speak of; yet, as his eyes followed the line of the ridge
against the sky, he experienced terror, the elementary, nauseating
terror of childhood, when the skin tingles, and the heart beats at a
suffocating gallop. It was very dark, but momentarily his eyes grew
accustomed to it. He was conscious of a queer, pungent smell, horribly
animal and corrupt.

Suddenly the utter silence broke. He heard a rattle of stones, the
splash of water about him, realised that it was the brook beneath his
feet, and that he, Maynard, was running for his life.

Neither then nor later did Reason assert herself. He ran without
question or amazement. His brain--the part where human reasoning holds
normal sway--was dominated by the purely primitive instinct of flight.
And in that sudden rout of courage and self-respect one conscious
thought alone remained. Whatever it was that was even then at his heels,
he must not see it. At all costs it must be behind him, and, resisting
the sudden terrified impulse to look over his shoulder, he unbuttoned
his tweed jacket and disengaged himself from it as he ran. The faint
haze that had gathered round the full moon dispersed, and he saw the
moor stretching before him, grey and still, glistening with dew.

He was of frugal and temperate habits, a wiry man at the height of his
physical powers, with lean flanks and a deep chest.

At Oxford they had said he was built to run for his life. He was running
for it now, and he knew it.

The ground sloped upwards after a while, and he tore up the incline,
breathing deep and hard; down into a shallow valley, leaping gorse
bushes, crashing through whortle and meadowsweet, stumbling over
peat-cuttings and the workings of forgotten tin-mines. An idiotic
popular tune raced through his brain. He found himself trying to frame
the words, but they broke into incoherent prayers, still to the same
grotesque tune.

Then, as he breasted the flank of a boulder-strewn tor, he seemed to
hear snuffling breathing behind him, and, redoubling his efforts,
stepped into a rabbit hole. He was up and running again in the twinkling
of an eye, limping from a twisted ankle as he ran.

He sprinted over the crest of the hill and thought he heard the sound
almost abreast of him, away to the right. In the dry bed of a
watercourse some stones were dislodged and fell with a rattle in the
stillness of the night; he bore away to the left. A moment later there
was Something nearly at his left elbow, and he smelt again the nameless,
fœtid reek. He doubled, and the ghastly truth flashed upon him. The
Thing was playing with him! He was being hunted for sport--the sport of
a horror unthinkable. The sweat ran down into his eyes.

He lost all count of time; his wrist watch was smashed on his wrist. He
ran through a reeling eternity, sobbing for breath, stumbling, tripping,
fighting a leaden weariness; and ever the same unreasoning terror urged
him on. The moon and ragged skyline swam about him; the blood drummed
deafeningly in his ears, and his eyeballs felt as if they would burst
from their sockets. He had nearly bitten his swollen tongue in two
falling over an unseen peat-cutting, and blood-flecked foam gathered on
his lips.

God, how he ran! But he was no longer among bog and heather. He was
running--shambling now--along a road. The loping pursuit of that
nameless, shapeless Something sounded like an echo in his head.

He was nearing a village, but saw nothing save a red mist that swam
before him like a fog. The road underfoot seemed to rise and fall in
wavelike undulations. Still he ran, with sobbing gasps and limbs that
swerved under his weight; at his elbow hung death unnamable, and the
fear of it urged him on while every instinct of his exhausted body
called out to him to fling up his hands and end it.

Out of the mist ahead rose the rough outline of a building by the
roadside; it was the village smithy, half workshop, half dwelling. The
road here skirted a patch of grass, and the moonlight, glistening on the
dew, showed the dark circular scars of the turf where, for a generation,
the smith's peat fires had heated the great iron hoops that tyred the
wheels of the wains. One of these was even then lying on the ground with
the turves placed in readiness for firing in the morning, and in the
throbbing darkness of Maynard's consciousness a voice seemed to speak
faintly--the voice of a girl:

"_There's a Thing that hunts people to death. But iron--cold iron--it
cannot cross._"

The sweat of death was already on his brow as he reeled sideways,
plunging blindly across the uneven tufts of grass. His feet caught in
some obstruction and he pitched forward into the sanctuary of the huge
iron tyre--a spasm of cramp twisting his limbs up under him.

As he fell a great blackness rose around him, and with it the bewildered
clamour of awakened dogs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Stanmore came down the flagged path from the smith's cottage,
pulling on his gloves. A big car was passing slowly up the village
street, and as it came abreast the smithy the doctor raised his hat.

The car stopped, and the driver, a fair-haired girl, leant sideways from
her seat.

"Good-morning, Dr. Stanmore! What's the matter here? Nothing wrong with
any of Matthew's children, is there?"

The Doctor shook his head gravely.

"No, Lady Dorothy; they're all at school. This is no one belonging to
the family--a stranger who was taken mysteriously ill last night just
outside the forge, and they brought him in. It's a most queer case, and
very difficult to diagnose--that is to say, to give a diagnosis in
keeping with one's professional--er--conscience."

The girl switched off the engine, and took her hand from the
brake-lever. Something in the doctor's manner arrested her interest.

"What is the matter with him?" she queried. "What diagnosis have you
made, professional or otherwise?"

"Shock, Lady Dorothy; severe exhaustion and shock, heart strained,
superficial lesions, bruises, scratches, and so forth. Mentally he is in
a great state of excitement and terror, lapsing into delirium at
times--that is really the most serious feature. In fact, unless I can
calm him I am afraid we may have some brain trouble on top of the other
thing. It's most mysterious!"

The girl nodded gravely, holding her underlip between her white teeth.

"What does he look like--in appearance, I mean? Is he young?"

The shadow of a smile crossed the doctor's eyes.

"Yes, Lady Dorothy--quite young, and very good-looking. He is a man of
remarkable athletic build. He is calmer now, and I have left Matthew's
wife with him while I slip out to see a couple of other patients."

Lady Dorothy rose from her seat and stepped down out of the car.

"I think I know your patient," she said. "In fact, I had taken the car
to look for him, to ask him to lunch with us. Do you think I might see
him for a minute? If it is the person I think it is I may be able to
help you diagnose his illness."

Together they walked up the path and entered the cottage. The doctor led
the way upstairs and opened a door. A woman sitting by the bed rose and
dropped a curtsey.

Lady Dorothy smiled a greeting to her and crossed over to the bed.
There, his face grey and drawn with exhaustion, with shadows round his
closed eyes, lay Maynard; one hand lying on the counterpane opened and
closed convulsively, his lips moved. The physician eyed the girl
interrogatively.

"Do you know him?" he asked.

She nodded, and put her firm, cool hand over the twitching fingers.

"Yes," she said. "And I warned him. Tell me, is he very ill?"

"He requires rest, careful nursing, absolute quiet----"

"All that he can have at the Manor," said the girl softly. She met the
doctor's eyes and looked away, a faint colour tingeing her cheeks. "Will
you go and telephone to father? I will take him back in the car now if
he is well enough to be moved."

"Yes, he is well enough to be moved," said the doctor. "It is very kind
of you, Lady Dorothy, and I will go and telephone at once. Will you stay
with him for a little while?"

He left the room, and they heard his feet go down the narrow stairs. The
cottage door opened and closed.

The two women, the old and the young, peasant and peer's daughter,
looked at each other, and there was in their glance that complete
understanding which can only exist between women.

"Do 'ee mind old Jarge Toms, my lady?"

Lady Dorothy nodded.

"I know, I know! And I warned him! They won't believe, these men! They
think because they are so big and strong that there is nothing that can
hurt them."

"'Twas th' iron that saved un, my lady. 'Twas inside one of John's new
tyres as was lyin' on the ground that us found un. Dogs barkin' wakened
us up. But it'd ha' had un, else----" A sound downstairs sent her flying
to the door. "'Tis the kettle, my lady. John's dinner spilin', an' I
forgettin'."

She hurried out of the room and closed the door.

The sound of their voices seemed to have roused the occupant of the bed.
His eyelids fluttered and opened; his eyes rested full on the girl's
face. For a moment there was no consciousness in their gaze; then a
whimsical ghost of a smile crept about his mouth.

"Go on," he said in a weak voice. "Say it!"

"Say what?" asked Lady Dorothy. She was suddenly aware that her hand was
still on his, but the twitching fingers had closed about hers in a calm,
firm grasp.

"Say 'I told you so'!"

She shook her head with a little smile.

"I told you that cold iron----"

"Cold iron saved me." He told her of the iron hoop on the ground outside
the forge. "You saved me last night."

She disengaged her hand gently.

"I saved you last night--since you say so. But in future----"

Someone was coming up the stairs. Maynard met her eyes with a long look.

"I have no fear," he said. "I have found something better than cold
iron."

The door opened and the doctor came in. He glanced at Maynard's face and
touched his pulse.

"The case is yours, Lady Dorothy!" he said with a little bow.




IX

THE TRAGEDY AT THE "LOUP NOIR"


The Boy at the corner of the table flicked the ash of his cigar into the
fire.

"Spiritualism is all rot!" he declared.

"I don't know," the Host reflected thoughtfully. "One hears queer
stories sometimes."

"Which reminds me----" started the Bore.

But before he could proceed any further the little French Judge
ruthlessly cut him short.

"Bah!" Contempt and geniality were mingled in his tone. "Who are we,
poor ignorant worms, that we should dare to say 'is' or 'is not'? Your
Shakespeare, he was right! 'There are more things in heaven and earth,
Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy!'"

The faces of the four Englishmen instantly assumed that peculiarly
stolid expression always called forth by the mention of Shakespeare.

"But Spiritualism----" started the Host.

Again the little French Judge broke in:

"I who you speak, I myself know of an experience, of the most
remarkable, to this day unexplained save by Spiritualism, Occultism,
what you will! You shall hear! The case is one I conducted
professionally some two years ago, though, of course, the events which I
now tell in their proper sequence, came out only in the trial. I string
them together for you, yes?"

The Bore, who fiercely resented any stories except his own, gave vent to
a discontented grunt; the other three prepared to listen carefully. From
the drawing-room, whither the ladies had retired after dinner, sounded
the far-away strains of a piano. The little French Judge held out his
glass for a crème de menthe; his eyes were sparkling with suppressed
excitement; he gazed deep into the shining green liquid as if seeing
therein a moving panorama of pictures, then he began:

On a dusky autumn evening, a young man, tall, olive-skinned, tramps
along the road leading from Paris to Longchamps. He is walking with a
quick, even swing. Now and again a hidden anxiety darkens his face.

Suddenly he branches off to the left; the path here is steep and muddy.
He stops in front of a blurred circle of yellow light; by this can one
faintly perceive the outlines of a building. Above the narrow doorway
hangs a creaking sign which announces to all it may concern that this is
the "Loup Noir," much sought after for its nearness to the racecourse
and for its excellent _ménage_.

"_Voilà!_" mutters our friend.

On entering, he is met by the burly innkeeper, a shrewd enough fellow,
who has seen something of life before settling down in Longchamps. The
young man glances past him as if seeking some other face, then
recollecting himself demands shelter for the night.

"I greatly fear----" began the innkeeper, then pauses, struck by an
idea. "Holà, Gaston! Have monsieur and madame from number fourteen yet
departed?"

"Yes, monsieur; already early this morning; you were at the market, so
Mademoiselle settled the bill."

"Mademoiselle Jehane?" the stranger looks up sharply.

"My niece, monsieur; you have perhaps heard of her, for I see by your
easel you are an artist. She is supposed to be of a rare beauty; I think
it myself." Jean Potin keeps up a running flow of talk as he conducts
his visitor down the long bare passages, past blistered yellow doors.

"It is a double room I must give you, vacated, as you heard, but this
very morning. They were going to stay longer, Monsieur and Madame
Guillaumet, but of a sudden she changed her mind. Oh, she was of a
temper!" Potin raises expressive eyes heavenwards. "It is ever so when
May weds with December."

"He was much older than his wife, then?" queries the artist, politely
feigning an interest he is far from feeling.

"_Mais non, parbleu!_ It was she who was the older--by some fifteen
years; and not a beauty. But rich--he knew what he was about, giving his
smooth cheek for her smooth louis!"

Left alone, Lou Arnaud proceeds to unpack his knapsack; he lingers over
it as long as possible; the task awaiting him below is no pleasant one.
Finally he descends. The small smoky _salle à manger_ is full of people.
There is much talk and laughter going on; the clatter of knives and
forks. At the desk near the door, a young girl is busy with the
accounts. Her very pale gold hair, parted and drawn loosely back over
the ears, casts a faint shadow on her pure, white skin. Arnaud, as he
chooses a seat, looks at her critically.

"Bah, she is insignificant!" he thinks. "What can have possessed
Claude?"

Suddenly she raises her eyes. They meet his in a long, steady gaze. Then
once again the lids are lowered.

The artist sets down his glass with a hand that shakes. He is not
imaginative, as a rule, but when one sees the soul of a mocking devil
look out, dark and compelling, from the face of a Madonna, one is
disconcerted.

He wonders no more what had possessed Claude. On his way to the door a
few moments later, he pauses at her desk.

"Monsieur wishes to order breakfast for to-morrow morning?"

"Monsieur wishes to speak with you."

She smiles demurely. Many have wished to speak with her. Arnaud divines
her thoughts.

"My name is Lou Arnaud!" he adds meaningly.

"Ah!" she ponders on this for an instant; then: "It is a warm night; if
you will seat yourself at one of the little tables in the courtyard at
the back of the house, I will try to join you, when these pigs have
finished feeding." She indicates with contempt the noisily eating crowd.

They sit long at that table, for the man has much to tell of his young
brother Claude; of the ruin she has made of his life; of the little
green devils that lurk in a glass of absinthe, and clutch their victim,
and drag him down deeper, ever deeper, into the great, green abyss.

But she only laughs, this Jehane of the wanton eyes.

"But what do you want from me? I have no need of this Claude. He
wearies me--now!"

Arnaud springs to his feet, catching her roughly by the wrist. He loves
his young brother much. His voice is raised, attracting the notice of
two or three groups who take coffee at the iron tables.

"You had need of him once. You never left him in peace till you had
sucked him of all that makes life good. If I could----"

Jean Potin appears in the doorway.

"Jehane, what are you doing out here? You know I do not permit it that
you speak with the visitors. Pardon her, monsieur, she is but a child."

"A child?" The artist's brow is black as thunder. "She has wrecked a
life, this child you speak of!"

He strides past the amazed innkeeper, up the narrow flight of stairs,
and down the passage to his room.

Sitting on the edge of the huge curtained four-poster bed, he ponders on
the events of the evening.

But his thoughts are not all of Claude. That girl--that girl with her
pale face and her pale hair, and eyes the grey of a storm cloud before
it breaks, she haunts him! Her soft murmuring voice has stolen into his
brain; he hears it in the drip, drip of the rain on the sill outside.

Soon heavy feet are heard trooping up the stairs; doors are heard to
bang; cheery voices wish each other good-night. Then gradually the
sounds die away. They keep early hours at the "Loup Noir"; it is not yet
ten o'clock.

Still Arnaud remains sitting on the edge of the bed; the dark plush
canopy overhead repels him, he does not feel inclined for sleep.
Jehane! what a picture she would make! He _must_ paint her!

Obsessed by this idea, he unpacks a roll of canvas, spreads it on the
tripod easel, and prepares crayons and charcoal; he will start the
picture as soon as it is day. He will paint her as Circe, mocking at her
grovelling herd of swine!

He creeps into bed and falls asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

Softly the rain patters against the window-pane.

A distant clock booms out eleven strokes.

Lou Arnaud raises his head. Then noiselessly he slides out of bed on the
chill wooden boarding. As in a trance he crosses the room, seizes
charcoal, and feverishly works at the blank canvas on the easel.

For twenty minutes his hand never falters, then the charcoal drops from
his nerveless fingers! Groping his way with half-closed eyes back to the
bed, he falls again into a heavy, dreamless slumber.

       *       *       *       *       *

The early morning sun chases away the raindrops of the night before.
Signs of activity are abroad in the inn; the swish of brooms; the noisy
clatter of pails. A warm aroma of coffee floats up the stairs and under
the door of number fourteen, awaking Arnaud to pleasant thoughts of
breakfast. He is partly dressed before his eye lights on the canvas he
had prepared.

"_Nom de Dieu!_"

He falls back against the wall, staring stupefied at the picture before
him. It is the picture of a girl, crouching in a kneeling position, all
the agony of death showing clearly in her upturned eyes. At her throat,
cruelly, relentlessly doing their murderous work, are a pair of
hands--ugly, podgy hands, but with what power behind them!

The face is the face of Jehane--a distorted, terrified Jehane! Arnaud
recoils, covering his eyes with his hands. Who could have drawn this
unspeakable thing? He looks again closely; the style is his own! There
is no mistaking those bold, black lines, that peculiar way of indicating
muscle beneath the tightly stretched skin--it _is_ his own work!
Anywhere would he have known it!

A knock at the door! Jean Potin enters, radiating cheerfulness.

"Breakfast in your room, monsieur? We are busy this morning; I share in
the work. Permit me to move the table and the easel--_Sacré-bleu!_"

Suddenly his rosy lips grow stern. "This is Jehane. Did she sit for
you--and when? You only came last night. What devil's work is this?"

"That is what I would like to find out; I know no more about it than you
yourself. When I awoke this morning the picture was there!"

"Did you draw it?" suspiciously.

"Yes. At least, no! Yes, I suppose I did. But I----"

Potin clenches his fist: "I will have the truth from the girl herself!
There is something here I do not like!" Roughly he pushes past the
artist and mounts to Jehane's room.

She is not there, neither is she at her desk. Nor yet down in the
village. They search everywhere; there is a hue and cry; people rush to
and fro.

Then suddenly a shout; and a silence, a dreadful silence.

Something is carried slowly into the "Loup Noir." Something that was
found huddled up in the shadow of the wall that borders the courtyard.
Something with ugly purple patches on the white throat.

It is Jehane, and she is dead; strangled by a pair of hands that came
from behind.

The story of the picture is rapidly passed from mouth to mouth. People
look strangely at Lou Arnaud; they remember his loud, strained voice and
threatening gestures on the preceding night.

Finally he is arrested on the charge of murder.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was the judge, gentlemen, on the occasion of the Arnaud trial.

The prisoner is questioned about the picture. He knows nothing; can tell
nothing of how it came there. His fellow-artists testify to its being
his work. From them also leaks out the tale of his brother Claude, of
the latter's infatuation and ruin. No need now to explain the quarrel in
the courtyard. The accused has good reason to hate the dead girl.

The Avocat for the defence does his best. The picture is produced in
court; it creates a sensation.

If only Lou Arnaud could complete it--could sketch in the owner of those
merciless hands. He is handed the charcoal; again and again he tries--in
vain.

The hands are not his own; but that is a small point in his favour. Why
should he have incriminated himself by drawing his own hands? But again,
why should he have drawn the picture at all?

There is nobody else on whom falls a shadow of suspicion. I sum up
impartially. The jury convict on circumstantial evidence, and I sentence
the prisoner to death.

A short time must elapse between the sentence and carrying it into
force. The Avocat for the defence obtains for the prisoner a slight
concession; he may have picture and charcoal in his cell. Perhaps he can
yet free himself from the web which has inmeshed him!

Arnaud tries to blot out thought by sketching in and erasing again
fanciful figures twisted into a peculiar position; he cannot adjust the
pose of the unknown murderer. So in despair he gives it up.

One morning, three days before the execution, the innkeeper comes to
visit him and finds him lying face downwards on the narrow pallet.
Despite his own grief, he is sorry for the young man; nor is he
convinced in his shrewd bourgeois mind of the latter's guilt.

"You _must_ draw in the second figure," he repeats again and again. "It
is your last, your only chance! Think of the faces you saw at the 'Loup
Noir.' Do none of them recall anything to you? You quarrelled with
Jehane in the garden about your brother. Then you went to your room. Oh,
what did you think in your room?"

"I thought of your niece," responds Arnaud wildly. "How very beautiful
she was, and what a model she would make. Then I prepared a blank
canvas for the morning, and went to bed. When I woke up the picture was
there."

"And you remember nothing more--nothing at all?" insists Jean Potin.
"You fell asleep at once? You heard no sound?"

Against the barred window of the cell the rain patters softly. A distant
clock booms out eleven strokes.

Something in the artist's brain seems to snap. He raises his head. He
slides from the bed. As in a trance he crosses the cell, seizes a piece
of charcoal, and feverishly works at the picture on the easel!

Not daring to speak, Jean Potin watches him. The figure behind the hands
grows and grows beneath Arnaud's fingers.

A woman's figure!

Then the face: a coarse, malignant face, distorted by evil passions.

"Ah!"

It is a cry of recognition from the breathless innkeeper. It breaks the
spell. The charcoal drops, and the prisoner, passing his hand across his
eyes, gazes bewildered at his own work.

"Who? What?"

"But I know her! It is the woman in whose room you slept! She was
staying at the 'Loup Noir' the very night before you arrived, and she
left that morning. She and her husband, Monsieur Guillaumet. But it is
incredible if _she_ should have----"

I will be short with you, gentlemen. Madame Guillaumet was traced to her
flat in Paris. Arnaud's Avocat confronted her with the now completed
picture. She was confounded--babbled like a mad woman--confessed!

A reprieve for further inquiry was granted by the State. Finally Arnaud
was cleared, and allowed to go free.

The motive for the murder? A woman's jealousy. Monsieur and Madame
Guillaumet had been married only ten months. Her age was forty-nine; his
twenty-seven. Every second of their married life was to her weighted
with intolerable suspicions; how soon would this young husband, so dear
to her, forsake her for another, now that his debts were paid? It preyed
upon her mind, distorting it, unbalancing it; each glance, each movement
of his she exaggerated into an intrigue.

On their way to Paris they stayed a few days at the "Loup Noir"; Charles
Guillaumet was interested in racing. Also, he became interested in a
certain Mdlle. Jehane. Madame, quick to see, insisted on an instant
departure.

The evening of the day of their departure she missed her husband, and
found he had taken the car. Where should he have gone? Back to the inn,
of course, only half-an-hour's run from Paris. She hired another car and
followed him, driving it herself. It was not a pleasant journey. The
first car she discovered forsaken, about half-a-mile distant from the
inn. Her own car she left beside it, and trudged the remaining distance
on foot.

The rest was easy.

Finding no sign of Guillaumet in front of the house, she stole round to
the back. There she found a door in the wall of the courtyard--a door
that led into the lane. That door was slightly ajar. She slipped in and
crouched down in the shadow.

Yes, there they were, her husband and Jehane; the latter was laughing,
luring him on--and she was young; oh, so young!

The woman watched, fascinated.

Charles bade Jehane good-bye, promising to come again. He kissed her
tenderly, passed through the gate; his steps were heard muffled along
the lane.

Jehane blew him a kiss, and then fastened the little door.

A distant clock boomed out eleven strokes, and a pair of hands stole
round the girl's throat, burying themselves deep, deep in the white
flesh.

       *       *       *       *       *

"And the husband, was he an accessory after the fact?" inquired the Boy.

"Possibly he guessed at the deed, yes; but, being a weakling, said
nothing for fear of implicating himself. It wasn't proved."

The Host moved uneasily in his chair.

"Do you mean to tell me that the mystery of the picture has never been
cleared up?" he asked. "Could Arnaud have actually seen the murder from
his window, and fixed it on the canvas?"

The little French Judge shook his head.

"Did I not tell you that his window faced front?" he replied. "No, that
point has not yet been explained. It is beyond us!"

He made a sweeping gesture, knocking over his liqueur glass; it fell
with a crash on the parquet floor.

The Bore woke with a start.

"And did they marry?" he queried.

"Who should marry?"

"That artist-chap and the girl--what was her name?--Jehane."

"Monsieur," quoth the little French Judge very gently and ironically, "I
grieve to state that was impossible, Jehane being dead."

The Boy at the corner of the table stood up and threw the stump of his
cigar into the fire.

"I think Spiritualism is all rot!" he declared.




 MILLER, SON, & COMPY., LIMITED,
            PRINTERS,
       FAKENHAM AND LONDON.




SOME NOTABLE SIXPENNY BOOKS

To be had of all Booksellers, or post free (Inland) 8d. each; four
volumes for 2s. 5d., or six for 3s. 6d. from THE PUBLISHER, 17,
Henrietta Street, London, W.C.


THE MYSTERIES OF MODERN LONDON.

                          By GEORGE R. SIMS,
                _Author of "The Devil in London," &c._

    "Full of fascinating interest and romance. Those who are interested
    in the curious will find here much that is piquant and
    stimulating."--_Daily News._

    "Is as fascinating as its title and its author's name would lead one
    to expect."--_T.P.'s Weekly._


SEVENTY YEARS A SHOWMAN

          MY ADVENTURES IN CAMP AND CARAVAN THE WORLD OVER.
                       By "LORD" GEORGE SANGER.
                            _Illustrated._

    In this volume the famous Showman relates many exciting experiences
    of his early days on the road, and recalls the trials and triumphs
    of a career more interesting than many a work of fiction.


QUEENS OF FRAILTY

                      By C. L. MCCLUER STEVENS,
            Author of "The Secret History of the Mormons."
                     Illustrated picture wrapper.

    This volume contains biographies of the following famous women: Nell
    Gwyn, the Marchioness of Brinvilliers, the wicked Countess of
    Shrewsbury, the Duchess of Kendal (the Maypole Duchess), Hannah
    Lightfoot, Elizabeth Chudleigh (the bigamous Duchess), Jeanne de
    Valois, Lady Hamilton, Jeanne du Barry, Mary Ann Clarke, the Lady
    with the Camelias, Lola Montez, Cora Pearl, Adah Menken.


THE SECRET HISTORY OF THE MORMONS

              A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE MOST EXTRAORDINARY
                 RELIGIOUS IMPOSTURE OF MODERN TIMES.
                      By C. L. MCCLUER STEVENS.


FIFTY YEARS A FIGHTER

                     THE LIFE STORY OF JEM MACE.
                 (_Formerly Champion of the World._)
                           TOLD BY HIMSELF.
                            _Illustrated._

    A record of the last of the old prizefighters, who fought to a
    finish many battles in the old prize ring. A list of the notorious
    champions Mace met and vanquished would fill many pages, but he has
    here set on record the romance of as wonderful a life as was ever
    lived.


CONFESSIONS OF A POACHER

                            By J. CONNELL.
                 _With Illustrations by S. T. DADD._

    _Field_: "The book is very remarkable, instructive in its
    disclosures of the dubious ways of poachers, and an intending reader
    cannot but be interested and amused."




_BOOKS TO MAKE US MERRY_

PRICE 1/- each net. (Postage, 3d. extra.)

_In stiff pictorial paper boards._


THE AMUSEMENT SERIES.

AFTER-DINNER SLEIGHTS. By LANG NEIL. With many Photographs, showing
tricks in actual operation.

CARD TRICKS WITHOUT SLEIGHT OF HAND OR APPARATUS. By L. WIDDOP.
Illustrated.

CONJURING WITH COINS. Including Tricks by NELSON DOWNS and other Eminent
Performers. Fully Illustrated with Photographs and Diagrams.

FUN ON THE BILLIARD TABLE. A Collection of 75 Amusing Tricks. By
STANCLIFFE. With Photographs.

HAND SHADOWS. The Complete Art of Shadowgraphy. By LOUIS NIKOLA. Fully
Illustrated.

INDOOR GAMES FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE. Edited by E. M. BAKER.
Illustrated.

MODERN CARD MANIPULATION. By C. LANG NEIL. Enlarged Edition. With many
Photographs, showing Tricks in operation.

THE NEW BOOK OF PUZZLES. Up-to-date and original. By A. CYRIL PEARSON.
With upwards of 100 Illustrations.

THE PEARSON PUZZLE BOOK. A Collection of over 100 of the Best Puzzles.
Edited by J. K. BENSON.

PEARSON'S BOOK OF FUN, MIRTH AND MYSTERY. Edited by Mr. X.

PEARSON'S HUMOROUS RECITER AND READER.

PLAYS FOR AMATEUR ACTORS. Containing Nine Original Plays. Six for
Adults, two for Children, and one for Scouts.

PLAYS AND DISPLAYS FOR SCOUT ENTERTAINMENTS. This volume contains six
long plays, also several shorter plays, and recitations.

PRACTICE STROKES AT BILLIARDS. For Tables of all Sizes. From the Match
Play of John Roberts and other leading players.

RECITATIONS FOR CHILDREN. Selected by JEAN BELFRAGE. With Three Original
Plays for Children.

SIMPLE CONJURING TRICKS THAT ANYBODY CAN PERFORM. By WILL GOLDSTON.

TRICKS FOR EVERYONE. By DAVID DEVANT. Illustrated with 134 Photographs.




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Dialect
    spellings have been retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Uncanny Tales, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNCANNY TALES ***

***** This file should be named 26606-0.txt or 26606-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/0/26606/

Produced by David Clarke, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
