The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Doors of Death, by Arthur B. Waltermire

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Doors of Death

Author: Arthur B. Waltermire

Release Date: June 3, 2010 [EBook #32671]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOORS OF DEATH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           The Doors of Death

                         By ARTHUR B. WALTERMIRE

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Weird Tales October
1936. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _A strange and curious story is this, about a banker whose
only fear was that he might be buried alive, like his grandfather before
him_]

PREFACE
A heavy stillness hung about the great halls and richly furnished rooms
of Judson McMasters' residence, and even seemed to extend out over the
velvet lawns, the shrub-lined walks and sun-blotched reaches under the
lacy elms and somber maples.

Biggs glided about the sick-chamber like a specter, apparently striving
to keep busy, while he cast countless furtive, uneasy glances at the
heavy figure under the white sheets. An odor of drugs and fever tainted
the air, and a small walnut table near the flushed sleeper was laden
with the familiar prescription bottle, tumbler and box of powders. On
the wall behind the table, near the head of the bed, hung a small
oil-painting of Napoleon.

The sleeper stirred restlessly, raised himself painfully and slowly, and
attempted to seek fleeting comfort in a new position. At the first
movement Biggs was a shadow at the bedside, deftly manipulating the
coverings and gently aiding the sick man with a tenderness born of long
service and deep affection. As the massive gray head sank into the
fluffed pillow the tired eyes opened, lighted by a faint glint of
thankfulness. Then they closed again and the once powerful body relaxed.

With a pitiful, wistful expression on his aged face, the faithful Biggs
stood helplessly peering at the sick man until hot tears began to course
down his furrowed cheeks, and he turned hastily away.

"Biggs!"

The voice, still strong and commanding, cut the semi-gloom like a knife.

Biggs, who was about to tuck the heavy curtains still more securely over
the windows, whirled as though he had touched a live wire, and in a
flash was across the great room and beside the bed.

"Did you call, sir?" His voice quavered.

"No"--a faint twinkle lighted the sick man's eyes--"I just spoke."

"Ah, now sir," cried the overjoyed Biggs, "you are better, sir."

"Biggs, I want some air and sunshine."

"But the doctor, sir----"

"Drat the doctor! If I'm going to pass out I want to see where I'm
going."

"Oh, but sir," expostulated the old servant, as he parted the curtains
and partially opened a casement window, "I wish you wouldn't say that,
sir."

"I believe in facing a situation squarely, Biggs. My father and
grandfather died from this family malady, and I guess I'm headed over
the same route."

"Please, sir," entreated Biggs.

"Biggs, I want to ask you a question."

"Yes, sir?"

"Are you a Christian?"

"I try to be, sir."

"Do you believe in death?"

Biggs was thoroughly startled and confused.

"Why--a--we all have to die, sometime, sir," he answered haltingly, not
knowing what else to say.

"But do we actually die?" insisted the sufferer.

"Well, I hope--not yet," ventured the old servant. "The doctor said----"

"Forget the doctor," interposed McMasters. "Biggs, you have been in our
service since I was a lad, haven't you?"

Tears welled into the servant's eyes, and his voice faltered.

"Fifty-six years, come next November," he answered.

"Well, let me tell you something, that even in those fifty-six years you
never learned, Biggs. My grandfather was buried alive!"

"Oh, sir! Impossible!" cried Biggs, in horror.

"Absolutely," asserted the banker.

"Why--are you--how do you know, sir?" in a hoarse whisper.

"My father built a family mausoleum in the far corner of this estate,
didn't he?"

"Yes, sir--he hated burial in the earth, sir, after reading a poem of
Edgar Allan Poe's, sir!"

"What poem was that, Biggs?"

"I don't recall the name of it, but I remember the line," faltered
Biggs.

"What was it?"

"Oh, sir," cried the old man, "let's talk about something cheerful."

"Not until we're through with this discussion, Hiram."

       *       *       *       *       *

The sound of his given name restored Biggs somewhat, for the banker
resorted to it only on occasions when he shared his deepest confidences
with his old houseman.

"Well, the line goes, 'Soft may the worms about him creep,' sir."

A slight shudder seemed to run through McMasters' body. Then after a
tomb-like silence, "Good reason for building the mausoleum."

"Yes, sir, I think so, sir."

"Well," with an apparent effort, "when they exhumed my grandfather's
remains to place them in the new vault, the casket was opened, and----"

"Oh, sir," cried Biggs, throwing out a trembling, expostulating hand,
but the banker went on, relentlessly.

"----the body was turned over, on its side, with the left knee drawn up
part-way."

"That's the way he always slept--in life." Biggs' voice was a hollow
whisper.

"And that's the reason my father, after building himself a mausoleum,
insisted that his body be cremated," said McMasters. "He took no
chances."

Biggs' horrified eyes traveled dully to the massive urn over the great
fireplace and rested there, fascinated.

"Hiram, where is heaven?"

Biggs' eyes flitted back to rest in surprize upon the questioner.

"Why, up there, sir," pointing toward the ceiling.

"Do you believe that the earth rotates on its axis?"

"That's what I was taught in school, sir."

"If that hypothesis is true, we are rolling through space at the rate of
about sixteen miles a minute," figured the banker. "Now you say heaven
is up there."

"Yes, sir."

"Biggs, what time is it?"

The servant glanced at the great clock in the corner.

"Ah, it's twelve o'clock, sir, and time for your medicine," in a voice
full of relief.

"Never mind the drugs," commanded McMasters, "until we finish our
problem in higher mathematics. Now, if I ask you where heaven is at
midnight, which will be twelve hours from now, where will you point,"
triumphantly.

"Why, up there," replied the bewildered servant, again indicating the
ceiling.

"Then," cried McMasters, "you will be pointing directly opposite from
the place you indicated a moment ago; for by midnight the earth will
have turned approximately upside down. Do you get my point?"

"Yes, sir," replied poor Biggs, thoroughly befuddled.

"Then where will heaven be at six o'clock this evening?" fairly shouted
the sick man.

"Out there," replied the servant, hopelessly, pointing toward the
window.

"And where will heaven be at six o'clock in the morning?"

"Over there." And Biggs pointed a trembling finger at the fireplace.
Then, "Oh, sir, let's not--the doctor----"

"Hang the doctor," interrupted McMasters testily. "I've been thinking
this thing over, and I've got to talk about it to someone."

"But don't you believe in a hereafter?" queried Biggs, a horrible note
of fear in his pitiful voice.

For a moment the banker was silent; the massive clock ticked solemnly
on. A coal toppled with a sputter and flare in the fireplace.

"Yes, Hiram," in a thoughtful voice, "I suppose I do."

"I'm glad to hear you say that," cried Biggs in very evident relief.

"Ah, if you could but tell me," continued the banker, "from whence we
come, and whither we go?"

"If I knew, sir, I'd be equal with the Creator," answered Biggs with
reverence.

"That's well said, Hiram, but it doesn't satisfy me. I've made my place
in the world by getting to the root of things. Ah, if I could only get a
peek behind the curtain, before I go--back-stage, you know--mayhap I
would not be afraid to die," and his voice fell almost to a whisper.

"The Great Director does not permit the audience behind the footlights,
unless he calls them," answered Biggs whimsically, the ghost of a smile
lighting up his troubled features.

"Another thing, Biggs, do you believe those stories about Jonah, and
Lazarus, and the fellow they let down through a hole in the roof to be
healed?"

"I do, sir," with conviction.

"Do you understand how it was done?" testily.

"Of course not, sir, being only a human."

"Then tell me, Hiram, when you cannot see through it, how can you
swallow all this theology?"

"My faith, sir," answered Biggs, simply, raising his eyes with
reverence.

At this, a quizzical smile came over the sick man's face.

"In looking up, Hiram, don't forget, since it is twelve-thirty, that we
have swung around four hundred and eighty miles from the spot you
originally designated as the location of the Pearly Gates."

"Oh, sir, I beg of you," remonstrated the servant, "I cannot bear to
have you jest on such a--why, master!" he broke off with a little cry,
rushing to his bedside.

The quizzical smile on the banker's face had suddenly faded, and his
head had fallen feebly back upon the pillow.

"Oh, why did he waste his strength so?" cried Biggs, piteously, as with
trembling hands and tear-blurred eyes he searched the little table for
the smelling-salts.

After a few breaths, the patient sighed and opened his eyes wearily.

"My medicine, Hiram, and then I must rest."

       *       *       *       *       *

At midnight, Biggs, dozing in a big chair by the fire, was aroused by a
voice from the sick bed.

"Hiram."

"Yes, sir," scurrying to turn on a subdued light.

"Where is heaven now?"

Noting the wan flicker of a smile, the old servant pointed solemnly
downward.

"You are a bright pupil," came in a scarcely audible voice.

"Thank you, sir."

"Do you know, Biggs, I wish I had led a different--a better life."

"You have been a good master, sir. You have been kind, you have given
liberally to charity," Biggs defended him.

"Yes," cynically, "I have given liberally to charity. But it has been no
sacrifice."

"You have been a pillar in the church," ventured Biggs.

"Yes," bitterly, "a stone pillar. I have paid handsomely for my pew, and
slept peacefully through the sermons. I have bought baskets of food for
the poor at Thanksgiving and Christmas time, only to let others reap the
happiness of giving them away. I could have had so much joy out of
Christmas, if I would. I could have been a jolly, rosy-cheeked Santa
Claus and gone to a hundred homes, my arms loaded with gifts."

"True, sir, but you made that joy possible for others."

"When I should have known the thrill of it myself. I have not really
lived, Hiram. To draw the sweets truly out of life, one must humble
himself and serve his fellow men. Yes, the scales have fallen from my
eyes, Hiram. But it is too late, 'the spirit is willing but the flesh is
weak'."

"It doesn't seem right, sir," said Biggs after a pause.

"What's that, Hiram?"

"Why, sir, that you should be stricken down in the prime of life, just
at a time when you could mean so much to others, while I, old and
useless, am permitted to live on. But I am not finding fault with
Providence, sir," Biggs hastened to say; "I just can't find the meaning
of the riddle, sir."

"Probably I've had my chance and fumbled it, Biggs."

"Even so, sir, God is not vindictive, according to my ideas. There
surely is some other solution. I'm still going to pray that He will take
me in your stead, even if a miracle must be performed."

"So you have faith in your prayers, do you, Biggs?"

"Yes, sir, if they are unselfish prayers."

"That brand is rather scarce, I take it," answered McMasters, but his
tone was reflective rather than sarcastic.

"Oh, sir, I wish you would pray as I do. God would surely understand."

"Rather a queer request, Hiram. If my life depends upon your death no
prayer shall ever pass my lips."

"But, sir, I'm an old----"

"However," interrupted McMasters, "I shall pray that if my life is
spared in any other fashion, I will make full amends for my years of
indifference and neglect. And, Hiram, no one knows how much I truly seek
this divine dispensation. But I have always scoffed at death-bed
confessions, and so my heart grows cold, for I have no right to
ask--now." Again, wearily, "No right--now."

"Ah, master, God is plenteous in mercy. If you but have the faith, sir,
it shall make you whole."

"Very good, had I lived as you have lived, Biggs." Then, after a pause,
"Still, the cause is worthy, my heart is right and I shall approach the
Throne. May God be merciful unto me, a sinner."

"I hope it is not too late yet," faltered Biggs. "Oh, if God would only
call me in your stead, that you might still do the good work that you
find it in your heart to do, how gladly would I go."

A deep sigh was his only answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long silence was finally broken by the sick man. But when he spoke,
his voice was so strange and uncanny that the servant hastened close and
peered anxiously into the fever-flushed face of the sufferer.

"Hiram--I must tell you--a secret," came in a laborious, almost
sepulchral, whisper.

Biggs came closer.

"Bring a chair and sit down. I must talk to you."

As the old servant again leaned forward, the sufferer hesitated; then
with an obvious effort he began.

"Hiram, I am going to give you some instructions which you must obey to
the letter. Will you promise to keep them?"

"I swear it, sir," with great earnestness.

"Good! Now, if this fever seals my lips and the doctor pronounces me
dead----"

"Please, sir," Biggs broke in, tears streaming down his furrowed cheeks,
but his master continued in the same subdued voice, "Whatever happens, I
am not to be embalmed--do you hear me?--not embalmed, but just laid away
as I am now."

"Yes, sir," in a choked voice, which fully betrayed the breaking heart
behind it.

"And now, Hiram, the rest of the secret." He paused and beckoned Biggs
to lean closer.

"In my vault--in the mausoleum, I have had an electric button installed.
That button connects with a silver bell. Lift up that small picture of
Napoleon, there upon the wall."

His hands trembling as with the palsy, Biggs reached out and lifted
aside the picture hanging near the head of the bed, and there revealed
the silver bell, fitted into a small aperture in the wall. Then, with a
sob, he fell back into his chair.

"Hiram"--in a whisper--"after they bury me, you are to sleep in this
bed."

With a cry, the old man threw out a horrified, expostulating hand.
Catching it feverishly, the banker half raised himself in bed.

"Don't you understand?" he cried fiercely. "I may not be dead after all.
Remember grandfather! And Biggs--if that bell rings, get help--quick!"

Suddenly releasing his hold, McMasters fell back limply among the
pillows.

       *       *       *       *       *

All through the long night the faithful Biggs maintained a sleepless
vigil, but the banker lay as immovable as a stone. When the rosy-cheeked
dawn came peeping audaciously through the casements, Biggs drew the
heavy curtains tightly shut once more.

Not until the doctor's motor whirled away did the patient rouse from his
lethargy.

Apparently strengthened by his deep stupor he spoke, and Biggs stood
instantly beside him.

"What did the doctor say?"

Biggs hesitated.

"Out with it, I'm no chicken-hearted weakling."

"Nothing much," admitted Biggs, sadly. "He only shook his head very
gravely."

"He doesn't understand this family malady any more than the old quack
who allowed my grandfather to be buried alive," said McMasters almost
fiercely.

Biggs shuddered and put a trembling hand to his eyes.

"What ails me, Biggs?" almost plaintively. "No one knows. This fever has
baffled the scientists for years. When you fall into a comatose
condition they call it suspended animation. That's the best thing they
do--find names for diseases. My family doctor doesn't have any more of
an idea about this malady than you or I. The average physician is just a
guesser. He guesses you have a fever and prescribes a remedy, hoping
that it will hit the spot. If it doesn't he looks wise, wags his
head--and tries something else on you. Maybe it works and maybe it
doesn't. The only thing my guesser is absolutely sure of is that if I
live or if I die, he will collect a princely fee for his services."

Biggs remained statuesque during the pause.

"Gad," McMasters broke out again testily, "if I fiddled around in my
business like that I'd be a pauper in a month."

"But the doctor says you're coming on," ventured Biggs.

"Sure he does," answered the banker with a sneer. "That's his stock in
trade. I know that line of palaver. Secretly, he knows I am as liable to
be dead as alive when he comes again."

"Oh, sir, you aren't going to die!"

"That's what I'm afraid of, Biggs. But they'll call me dead and go ahead
and embalm me and make sure of it."

"Oh, sir, I wish----"

"Now remember, Biggs," broke in the sick man, "shoot the first
undertaker that tries to put that mummy stuff in my veins."

"I understand perfectly, sir," answered Biggs, fearful lest the other's
excitement might again give him a turn for the worse.

"I know I'm apparently going to pass away. My father and grandfather
both had this cussed virus in their veins, and I don't believe either of
them was dead when he was pronounced so!"

"Well, if by any chance--that is, if you," began Biggs desperately, "if
you are apparently--dead--why not have them keep your body here in the
house for a time?"

"Convention, formality, custom, hide-bound law!" the banker fairly
frothed. "The health authorities would come here with an army and see
that I was buried. No, Biggs, I've got a fine crypt out there, all quiet
and secure, good ventilation, electric lights, like a pullman berth--and
a push-button. That precludes all notoriety. It's secret and safe. The
electrician who installed the apparatus died four years ago. So you and
I, alone, possess this knowledge."

"Don't you think someone else should know of it too? Your attorney,
or----"

"No, Biggs. If I really am dead I don't want anyone to write up my
eccentricities for some Sunday magazine sheet. And if I do come back,
then it will be time to tell the gaping public about my cleverness."

"I wish you weren't so--so cold-blooded about it all, sir."

"I have always hit straight from the shoulder, Hiram, and I'm facing
this death business as I'd face any other proposition. I'm not ready to
cash in, and if I can cheat the doctors, undertakers, lawyers, heirs,
and chief mourners for a few more years, I'm going to do it. And don't
forget poor old granddad. He might have been up and about yet had he but
used my scheme."

       *       *       *       *       *

Biggs turned away, sick at heart. It was too terrible beyond words. To
him his religion was as essential as daily bread. Death was the
culmination of cherished belief and constant prayer. As his years
declined he had faced the inevitable day with simple faith that when the
summons came he would go gladly, like him "who wraps the drapery of his
couch about him and lies down to pleasant dreams." With throbbing heart
he listened for another torrent of words that would still further stab
his sensitive soul; for he had loved and revered his master from his
youth up.

But no words came. He wheeled about. The massive head had fallen limply
among the pillows. Pallid lips were trying to form sentences without
result. Then the great body seemed to subside immeasurably deeper into
the covers and a death-like stillness fell upon the room.

Intuitively feeling that his master was worse than at any previous
relapse, Biggs made every effort to revive him, gently at first, and
then by vigorously shaking and calling to him in a heart-broken, piteous
voice. But to no avail. The heavy figure looked pallid and corpse-like
under the snowy sheets.

Long hours dragged by, and still the lonely old servant sat mutely
beside the bed, only aroused, at last, by the peremptory, measured call
of the telephone bell.

"Yes," said Biggs in a quavering voice. "Oh yes, Doctor Meredith,
Master's resting easy. Don't think you'll need to come until tomorrow."

"I'll keep them away as long as I can," he muttered, as he slipped back
to his vigil. "God grant--maybe he'll come back--and take up the work of
the Master, so long delayed. Oh God! If Thou wouldst only take me in his
stead!"

Sleeping fitfully, Biggs sat dumbly through an interminable night, but
the new day brought no reassuring sign from the inert form. The
stillness was appalling. The other servants were quartered in a distant
part of the mansion and only came when summoned. Again Biggs assured the
physician that he could gain nothing by calling, and another awful night
found him, ashen and distraught, at the bedside. Sometime in the still
watches he swooned and kindly nature patched up his shredded nerves,
before consciousness once more aroused him. But the strain was more than
he could bear. So when the anxious specialist came, unbidden, he found a
shattered old watchman who broke down completely and babbled forth the
whole mysterious tale, concealing nothing but the secret of the tomb.

In a coffin previously made to order, they laid the unembalmed remains
of Judson McMasters in the family mausoleum, and the world which had
felt his masterful presence for so many years paused long enough to lay
a costly tribute on his bier and then went smoothly on its way.

Not so with the faithful Biggs. Ensconced in his master's bedroom, he
nightly tossed in troubled sleep, filled with the jangling of
innumerable electric bells. And when--on the tenth night, after he had
been somewhat reassured that all was well--he was suddenly awakened by a
mad, incessant ringing from the hidden alarm, a deathly weakness
overcame him and it was some time before he was able to drag his palsied
body from the bed. With fumbling, clumsy fingers he tried to hasten, but
it was many minutes before he tottered, half dressed, out of the room.
And as he did so, his heart almost stood still, then mounted to his
throat as if to choke him.

"Biggs!"--a voice--McMaster's voice was calling.

He staggered to the head of the wide, massive stairway and looked down.
There stood the banker, pale, emaciated, but smiling.

And then, as from an endless distance, came more words:

"I forgot to tell you that I had a trap-door in the end of the casket.
When you didn't answer the bell, I found I could come alone."

With an inarticulate cry, Biggs stretched out his trembling arms.

"My Master, I am coming now."

Then he swayed, stumbled, clutched feebly at the rail and plunged
headlong to the foot of the stairs, a crumpled, lifeless form.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Doors of Death, by Arthur B. Waltermire

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOORS OF DEATH ***

***** This file should be named 32671.txt or 32671.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/7/32671/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
