The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tiger Cat, by David H. Keller

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tiger Cat

Author: David H. Keller

Release Date: May 31, 2010 [EBook #32630]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIGER CAT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              Tiger Cat

                          By DAVID H. KELLER

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Weird Tales October
1937. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _A grim tale of torture, and the blind men who were chained
to pillars in an underground cave_]

PREFACE
The man tried his best to sell me the house. He was confident that I
would like it. Repeatedly he called my attention to the view.

There was something in what he said about the view. The villa on the top
of a mountain commanded a vision of the valley, vine-clad and
cottage-studded. It was an irregular bowl of green, dotted with stone
houses which were whitewashed to almost painful brilliancy.

The valley was three and a third miles at its greatest width. Standing
at the front door of the house, an expert marksman with telescopic sight
could have placed a rifle bullet in each of the white marks of cottages.
They nestled like little pearls amid a sea of green grape-vines.

"A wonderful view, _Signor_," the real-estate agent repeated. "That
scene, at any time of the year, is worth twice what I am asking for the
villa."

"But I can see all this without buying," I argued.

"Not without trespassing."

"But the place is old. It has no running water."

"Wrong!" and he smiled expansively, showing a row of gold-filled teeth.
"Listen."

We were silent.

There came to us the sound of bubbling water. Turning, I traced the
sound. I found a marble Cupid spurting water in a most peculiar way into
a wall basin. I smiled and commented.

"There is one like that in Brussels and another in Madrid. But this is
very fine. However, I referred to running water in a modern bathroom."

"But why bathe when you can sit here and enjoy the view?"

He was impossible. So, I wrote a check, took his bill of sale and became
the owner of a mountain, topped by a stone house that seemed to be half
ruin. But he did not know, and I did not tell him that I considered the
fountain alone worth the price that I had paid. In fact, I had come to
Italy to buy that fountain if I could; buy it and take it back to
America with me. I knew all about that curious piece of marble. George
Seabrook had written to me about it. Just one letter, and then he had
gone on, goodness knows where. George was like that, always on the move.
Now I owned the fountain and was already planning where I should place
it in my New York home. Certainly not in the rose garden.

I sat down on a marble bench and looked down on the valley. The
real-estate man was right. It was a delicate, delicious piece of
scenery. The surrounding mountains were high enough to throw a constant
shadow on some part of the valley except at high noon. There was no sign
of life, but I was sure that the vineyards were alive with husband-men
and their families. An eagle floated serenely on the upper air currents,
automatically adjusting himself to their constant changing.

Stretching myself, I gave one look at my car and then walked into the
house.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the kitchen two peasants sat, an old man and an old woman. They rose
as I entered.

"Who are you?" I asked in English.

They simply smiled and waved their hands. I repeated my question in
Italian.

"We serve," the man replied.

"Serve whom?"

"Whoever is the master."

"Have you been here long?"

"We have always been here. It is our home."

His statement amused me, and I commented, "The masters come and go, but
you remain?"

"It seems so."

"Many masters?"

"Alas! yes. They come and go. Nice young men, like you, but they do not
stay. They buy and look at the view, and eat with us a few days and then
they are gone."

"And then the villa is sold again?"

The man shrugged. "How should we know? We simply serve."

"Then prepare me my dinner. And serve it outside, under the grapevine,
where I can see the view."

The woman started to obey. The man came nearer.

"Shall I carry your bags to the bedroom?"

"Yes. And I will go with you and unpack."

He took me to a room on the second floor. There was a bed there and a
very old chest of drawers. The floor, everything about the room was
spotlessly clean. The walls had been freshly whitewashed. Their smooth
whiteness suggested wonderful possibilities for despoliation, the
drawing of a picture, the writing of a poem, the careless writhing
autograph that caused my relatives so much despair.

"Have all the masters slept here?" I asked carelessly.

"All."

"Was there one by the name of George Seabrook?"

"I think so. But they come and go. I am old and forget."

"And all these masters, none of them ever wrote on the walls?"

"Of a certainty. All wrote with pencil what they desired to write. Who
should say they should not? For did not the villa belong to them while
they were here? But always we prepared for the new master, and made the
walls clean and beautiful again."

"You were always sure that there would be a new master?"

"Certainly. Someone must pay us our wages."

I gravely placed a gold piece in his itching palm, asking, "What did
they write on the walls?"

He looked at me with old, unblinking eyes. Owl eyes! That is what they
were, and he slowly said,

"Each wrote or drew as his fancy led him, for they were the masters and
could do as they wished."

"But what were the words?"

"I cannot speak English, or read it."

Evidently, the man was not going to talk. To me the entire situation was
most interesting. Same servants, same villa, many masters. They came and
bought and wrote on the wall and left, and then my real-estate friend
sold the house again. A fine racket!

Downstairs, outdoors, under the grapevine, eating a good Italian meal,
looking at the wonderful view, I came to laugh at my suspicions. I ate
spaghetti, olives, dark bread and wine. Silence hung heavily over the
sullen sleepy afternoon. The sky became copper-colored. It was about to
rain. The old man came and showed me a place to put my car, a recess in
the wall of the house, open at one end, but sheltered from the weather.
The stone floor was black with grease; more than one automobile had been
kept there.

"Other cars have been here," I ventured.

"All the masters had cars," the old man replied.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back on the stone gallery I waited for the storm to break. At last it
came in a solid wall of gray wetness across the valley. Nearer and
nearer it came till it deluged my villa and drove me inside.

The woman was lighting candles. I took one from her hand.

"I want to look through the house," I explained.

She made no protest; so I started exploring the first floor. One room
was evidently the sleeping-quarters for the servants; another was the
kitchen, and the remaining two might have served in the old days for
dining-room and drawing-room. There was little furniture, and the walls
were gray with time and mold. One flight of stone stairs led upward to
the bedroom, another to the cellar. I decided to go downstairs.

They were steps, not made of masonry, but apparently carved out of the
living rock. The cellar was simply a cubical hole in the mountain. It
all looked very old. I had the uneasy feeling that originally that
cellar had been a tomb and that later the house had been built over it.
But, once at the bottom, there was nothing to indicate a sepulcher. A
few small casks of wine, some junk, odds of rope and rusty iron, those
were in the corners; otherwise, the room was empty, and dusty.

"It is an odd room," I commented to myself. It seemed in some way out of
place and out of shape and size for the villa above it. I had expected
something more, something larger, gloomier. Walking around, I examined
the walls, and then something came to my alert senses.

Three sides of the room were carved out of rock, but the remaining side
was of masonry, and in that side there was a door. A door! And why
should a door be there except to lead to another room? There was a door,
and that presupposed something on the other side. And what a door it
was! More of a barricade than a partition. The iron hinges were built to
support weight and give complete defense and support. There was a
keyhole, and if the key corresponded with the size of the hole, it was
the largest that I had ever heard of.

Naturally, I wanted to open the door. As master of the villa, I had a
right to. Upstairs the old woman seemed unable to understand me and
ended by telling me to see her husband. He, in turn, seemed incapable of
following my stream of talk. At last, I took him to the door and pointed
to the keyhole. In English, Italian and sign language I told him rather
emphatically that I wanted the key to that door. At last he was willing
to admit that he understood my questions. He shook his head. He had
never had the key to that door. Yes, he knew that there was such a door,
but he had never been on the other side. It was very old. Perhaps his
ancestors understood about it, but they were all dead. He made me tired,
so much so that I rested by placing a hand on the butt of the upper
hinge. I knew that he was deceiving me. Lived there all his life and
never saw the door open!

"And you have no key to that door?" I repeated.

"No. I have no key."

"Who has the key?"

"The owner of the house."

"But I own it."

"Yes, you are the master; but I mean the one who owns it all the time."

"So, the various masters do not really buy the place?"

"They buy it, but they come and go."

"But the owner keeps on selling it and owning it?"

"Yes."

"Must be a profitable business. And who owns it?"

"Donna Marchesi."

"I think I met her yesterday in Sorona."

"Yes, that is where she lives."

The storm had passed. Sorona was only two miles away, on the other side
of the mountain. The cellar, the door, the mysterious uncertainty on the
other side intrigued me. I told the man that I would be back by supper,
and I went to my bedroom to change, preparatory to making an afternoon
call.

In the room I found my hand black with oil.

And that told me a good many things, as it was the hand that had rested
against the upper hinge of the door. I washed the hand, changed my
clothes and drove my car to Sorona.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fortunately, the Donna Marchesi was at home. I might have met her
before, but I now saw her ethereal beauty for the first time. At least,
it seemed ethereal at the first moment. In some ways she was the most
beautiful woman that I had ever seen: skin white as milk, hair a tawny
red, piled in great masses on her head, and eyes of a peculiar green,
with pupils that were slots instead of circles. She wore her nails long,
and they were tinted red to match the Titian of her hair. She seemed
surprized to have me call on her, and more surprized to hear of my
errand.

"You bought the villa?" she asked.

"Yes. Though, when I bought it, I did not know that you were the owner.
The agent never stated whom he was acting for."

"I know," she said with a smile. "Franco is peculiar that way. He always
pretends that he owns the place."

"No doubt he has used it more than once."

"I fear so. The place seems to be unfortunate. I sell it with a reserve
clause. The owner must live there. And no one seems to want to stay; so
the place reverts back to me."

"It seems to be an old place."

"Very old. It has been in my family for generations. I have tried to get
rid of it, but what can I do when the young men will not stay?"

She shrugged her shoulders expressively. I countered with,

"Perhaps if they knew, as I do, that you owned the property, they would
be content to stay, for ever, in Sorona."

"Prettily said," she answered. Then the room became silent, and I heard
her heavy breathing, like the deep purr of a cat.

"They come and go," she said at last.

"And, when they go, you sell to another?" I asked.

"Naturally, and with the hope that one will stay."

"I have come for the key," I said bluntly, "the key to the cellar door."

"Are you sure you want it?"

"Absolutely! It is my villa and my cellar and my door. I want the key. I
want to see what is on the other side of the door."

And then it was that I saw the pupils of her eyes narrow to livid slits.
She looked at me for a second, for five, and then opening a drawer in a
cabinet near her chair, she took out the key and handed it to me. It was
a tool worthy of the door that it was supposed to open, being fully
eight inches long and a pound in weight.

Taking it, I thanked her and said good-bye. Fifteen minutes later I was
back, profuse in my apologies: I was temperamental, I explained, and I
frequently changed my mind. Whatever was on the other side of the door
could stay there, as far as I was concerned. Then again I kissed her
hand farewell.

On the side street I passed through the door of a locksmith and waited
while he completed a key. He was following a wax impression of the
original key. An hour later I was on the way back to the villa, with the
key in my pocket, a key that I was sure would unlock the door, and I was
confident that the lady with the cat eyes felt sure that I had lost all
interest in that door and what was beyond it.

The full moon was just appearing over the mountains when I drove my car
up to the villa. I was tired, but happy. Taking the candlestick in my
hand, which candlestick was handed to me with a deep bow by the old
woman, I ascended the stairs to my bedroom. And soon I was fast asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

I awoke with a start. The moon was still shining. It was midnight. I
heard, or thought I heard, a deep moaning. It sounded a little like
waves beating on a rockbound coast. Then it ceased and was replaced by a
musical element that came in certain stately measures. Those sounds were
in the room, but they came from far away; only by straining my sense of
sound to the utmost could I hear anything.

Slippers on my feet, flashlight in my hand and the key in the pocket of
my dressing-gown, I slowly descended the stairs. Loud snores from the
servants' room told, or seemed to tell, of their deep slumbers. Down
into the cellar I went and put the key into the hole of the lock. The
key turned easily--no rust there--the springs and the tumblers had been
well oiled, like the hinges. It was evident that the door had been used
often. Turning the light on the hinges, I saw what had made my hand
black with oil. Earnestly I damned the servants. They knew about the
door. They knew what was on the other side!

Just as I was about to open the door I heard a woman's voice singing in
Italian; it sounded like a selection from an opera. It was followed by
applause, and then a moaning, and one shrill cry, as though someone had
been hurt. There was no doubt now as to where the sounds that I heard in
my room had come from; they had come from the other side of the door.
There was a mystery there for me to solve. But I was not ready to solve
it; so I turned the key noiselessly, and with the door locked, tiptoed
back to my bed.

There I tried to put two and two together. They made five, seven, a
million vague admixtures of impossible results, all filled with weird
forebodings. But never did they make four, and till they did, I knew the
answers to be wrong, for two and two had to make four.

Many changes of masters! One after another they came and bought and
disappeared. A whitewashed wall. What secrets were covered with that
whitewash? A door in a cellar. And what deviltry went on behind it? A
key and a well-oiled lock, and servants that knew everything. In vain
the question came to me. _What is back of the door?_ There was no ready
answer. But, Donna Marchesi knew! Was it her voice that I had heard? She
knew almost everything about it, but there was one thing that I knew and
she did not. She did not know that I could pass through the door and
find out what was on the other side. She did not know that I had a key.

The next day I pleaded indisposition and spent most of the hours idling
and drowsing in my chamber. Not till nearly midnight did I venture down.
The servants were certainly asleep that time. A dose of chloral in their
wine had attended to the certainty of their slumbers. Fully dressed,
with an automatic in my pocket, I reached the cellar and opened the
door. It swung noiselessly on its well-greased hinges. The darkness on
the other side was the blackness of hell. An indescribable odor came to
me, a prison smell and with it the soft half sob, half laugh of sleeping
children, dreaming in their sleep, and not happy.

I flashed the light around the room. It was not a room but a cavern, a
cave that extended far into the distance, the roof supported by stone
pillars, set at regular intervals. As far as my light would carry I saw
the long rows of white columns.

And to each pillar was bound a man, by chains. They were resting on the
stone floor, twenty or more of them, and all asleep. Snores, grunts and
weary sighs came from them, but not a single eyelid opened. Even when I
flashed the light in their faces their eyes were shut.

And those faces sickened me; white and drawn and filled with the lines
of deep suffering. All were covered with scars; long, narrow, deep
scars, some fresh and red, others old and dead-white. At last, the
sunken eyelids and the inability to see my flashlight and respond told
me the nauseating truth. Those men were all blind.

[Illustration: "Looking eternally into the blackness of his life and
chained to a pillar of stone."]

A pleasant sight! One blind man, looking eternally into the blackness of
his life, and chained to a pillar of stone--that was bad enough; but
multiply that by twenty! Was it worse? Could it be worse? Could twenty
men suffer more than one man? And then a thought came to me, a terrible,
impossible thought, so horrible that I doubted my logic. But now two and
two were beginning to make four. Could those men be the _masters_? They
came and bought and left--to go to the cellar and stay there!

"Oh! Donna Marchesi!" I whispered. "How about those cat-eyes? If you had
a hand in this, you are not a woman. You are a tiger."

       *       *       *       *       *

I thought that I understood part of it. The latest master came to her
for the key to the cellar, and then, when he once passed through the
door he never left. She and her servants were not there to welcome me
that night, because she did not know that I had a key.

The thought came to me that perhaps one of those sleeping men was George
Seabrook. He and I used to play tennis together and we knew each other
like brothers. He had a large scar on the back of his right hand; a
livid star-shaped scar. With that in mind, I walked carefully from
sleeping man to sleeping man, looking at their right hands. And I found
a right hand with a scar that was shaped like the one I knew so well.
But that blind man, only a skin-covered skeleton, chained to a bed of
stone! That could not be my gay young tennis player, George!

The discovery nauseated me. What did it mean? What _could_ it mean? If
the Donna Marchesi was back of all that misery, what was her motive?

Down the long cave-like room I went. There seemed to be no end to it,
though many of the columns were surrounded with empty chains. Only those
near the door had their human flies in the trap. In the opposite
direction the rows of pillars stretched into a far oblivion. I thought
that at the end there was the black mouth of a tunnel, but I could not
be sure and dared not go that far to explore the truth. Then, out of
that tunnel, I heard a voice come, a singing voice. Slipping my shoes
off, I ran back near the door and hid as best I could in a dark recess,
back of a far piece of stone. I stood there in the darkness, my torch
out, the handle of the revolver in my hand.

The singing grew louder and louder, and then the singer came into view.
It was none other than Donna Marchesi! She carried a lantern in one hand
and a basket in the other. Hanging the lantern on a nail, she took the
basket and went from one sleeping man to another. With each her
performance was the same; she awakened them with a kick in the face, and
then, when they sat up crying with pain, she placed a hard roll of bread
in their blind, trembling, outstretched hand. With all fed, there was
silence save for gnawing teeth breaking through the hard crusts. The
poor devils were hungry, starving slowly to death, and how they wolfed
the bread! She laughed with animal delight as they cried for more.
Standing under the lamp, a lovely devil in her decolleté dress, she
laughed at them. I swear I saw her yellow eyes, dilated in the
semi-darkness!

Suddenly she gave the command,

"Up! you dogs, _up_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Like well-trained animals they rose to their feet, clumsily, but as fast
as they could under the handicap of trembling limbs and heavy chains.
Two were slow in obeying, and those she struck across the face with a
small whip, till they whined with pain.

They stood there in silence, twenty odd blind men, chained against as
many pillars of stone; and then the woman, standing in the middle of
them, started to sing. It was a well-trained voice, but metallic, and
her high notes had in them the cry of a wild animal. No feminine
softness there. She sang from an Italian opera, and I knew that I had
heard that song before. While she sang, her audience waited silently. At
last she finished, and they started to applaud. Shrunken hands beat
noisily against shrunken hands.

She seemed to watch them carefully, as though she were measuring the
degree of their appreciation. One man did not satisfy her. She went over
and dug into his face with long strokes of those long red nails until
his face was red and her fingers bloody. And when she finished her
second song that man clapped louder than any of them. He had learned his
lesson.

She ended by giving them each another roll and a dipper of water. Then,
lantern and basket in her hands, she walked away and disappeared down
the tunnel. The blind men, crying and cursing in their impotent rage,
sank down on their stone beds.

I went to my friend, and took his hand.

"George! George Seabrook!" I whispered.

He sat up and cried, "Who calls me? Who is there?"

I told him, and he started to cry. At last he became quiet enough to
talk to me. What he told me, with slight variants, was the story of all
the men there and all the men who had been there but who had died. Each
man had been master for a day or a week. Each had found the cellar door
and had come to the Donna Marchesi for the key. Some had been suspicious
and had written their thoughts on the wall of their bedroom. But one and
all had, in the end, found their curiosity more than they could resist
and had opened the door. On the other side they had been overpowered and
chained to a pillar, and there they had remained till they died. Some of
them lived longer than the rest. Smith of Boston had been there over two
years, though he was coughing badly and did not think that he could last
much longer. Seabrook told me their names. They were the best blood of
America, with three Englishmen and one Frenchman.

"And are you all blind?" I whispered, dreading the answer.

"Yes. That happens the first night we are here. She does it with her
nails."

"And she comes every night?"

"Every night. She feeds us and sings to us and we applaud. When one of
us dies, she unchains the body, and throws it down a hole somewhere. She
talks to us about that hole sometimes and brags that she is going to
fill it up before she stops."

"But who is helping her?"

"I think it is the real-estate man. Of course, the old devils upstairs
help. I think that they must drug us. Some of the men say that they went
to sleep in their beds and woke, chained to their posts."

My voice trembled as I bent over and whispered in his ear, "What would
you do, George, if she came and sang, and you found that you were not
chained? You and the other men not chained? What would you men do,
George?"

"Ask them," he snarled. "Ask them, one at a time. But I know what I
would do. I know!"

And he started to cry, because he could not do it the next second; cried
from rage and helplessness till the tears ran from his empty sockets.

"Does she always come at the same time?"

"As far as I know. But time is nothing to us. We just wait for death."

"Are the chains locked?"

"Yes. And she must have the key. But we could file the links if only we
had files. If only each of us had a file, we could get free. Perhaps the
man upstairs has a key, but I hardly think so."

"Did you write on that pretty wall upstairs, the whitewashed wall?"

"I did; I think we all did. One man wrote a sonnet to the woman, verses
in her honor, telling about her beautiful eyes. He raved about that poem
for hours while he was dying. Did you ever see it on the wall?"

"I did not see it. The old people whitewash the walls before each new
master comes."

"I thought so."

"Are you sure you would know what to do, George, if she sang to you and
you were loose?"

"Yes, we would know."

So I left him, promising an end to the matter as soon as I could arrange
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day saw me calling on the Donna Marchesi. I took her flowers
that time, a corsage of vivid purple and scarlet orchids. She
entertained me in her music room and I, taking the hint, asked her to
sing. Shyly, almost with reluctance, she did as I asked. She sang the
selection from the Italian opera that I knew so well. I was generous in
my applause.

She smiled.

"You like to hear me sing?"

"Indeed! I want to hear you again. I could hear you daily without
growing tired."

"You're nice," she purred. "Perhaps it could be arranged."

"You are too modest. You have a wonderful voice. Why not give it to the
world?"

"I sang once in public," she sighed. "It was in New York, at a private
musical. There were many men there. Perhaps it was stage fright; my
voice broke badly, and the audience, especially the men, were not kind.
I am not sure, but I thought that I heard some of them hiss me."

"Surely not!" I protested.

"Indeed, so. But no man has hissed my singing since then."

"I hope not!" I replied indignantly. "You have a wonderful voice, and,
when I applauded you, I was sincere. By the way, may I change my mind
and ask for the key to the door in the cellar?"

"Do you want it, really want it, my friend?"

"I am sure I do. I may never use it, but it will please me to have it.
Little things in life make me happy, and this key is a little thing."

"Then you shall have it. Will you do me a favor? Wait till Sunday to use
it. Today is Friday, and you will not have to wait many hours."

"It will be a pleasure to do as you desire," I replied, kissing her
hand. "And shall I hear you sing again? May I come often to hear you
sing?"

"I promise you that," she sighed. "I am sure that you will hear me sing
often in the future. I feel that in some way our fates approach the same
star."

I looked into her eyes, her yellow cat-eyes, and I was sure that she
spoke the truth. Destiny had certainly brought me to find her in Sorona.

       *       *       *       *       *

I bought two dozen rat-tailed files, and dashed across the mountains to
Milan. There I was closeted with the consuls of three nations: England,
France and my own. They did not want to believe my story. I gave them
names, and they had to admit that there had been inquiries, but they
felt that the main details were nightmares, resulting from an over-use
of Italian wines. But I insisted that I was not drunk with new wine. At
last, they called in the chief of the detective bureau. He knew Franco,
the real-estate agent; also the lady in question. And he had heard
something of the villa; not much, but vague whisperings.

"We will be there Saturday night," he promised. "That leaves you
tonight. The lady will not try to trap you till Sunday. Can you attend
to the old people?"

"They will be harmless. See that Franco does not have a chance to
escape. Here is the extra key to the door. I will go through before
twelve. When I am ready, I will open the door. If I am not out by one in
the morning, you come through with your police. Do we all understand?"

"I understand," said the American consul. "But I still think you are
dreaming."

Back at the villa, I again drugged the old people, not much, but enough
to insure their sleep that night. They liked me. I was liberal with my
gold, and I carelessly showed them where I kept my reserve.

Then I went through the door. Again I heard the Donna Marchesi sing to
an audience that would never hiss her. She left, and I started to
distribute the files. From one blind wretch to the next I went,
whispering words of cheer and instruction for the next night. They were
to cut through a link in the chain, but in such a way that the Tiger Cat
would not suspect that they had gained their liberty. Were they pleased
to have a hope of freedom? I am not sure, but they were delighted at
another prospect.

The next night I doubled the tips to the old servants. With tears of
gratitude in their eyes, they thanked me as they called me their dear
master. I put them to sleep as though they were babies. In fact, I
wondered at the time if they would ever recover from the dose of chloral
I gave them. I did not even bother to tie them, but just tossed them on
their beds.

At half past ten, automobiles began to arrive with darkened lights. We
had a lengthy conference, and soon after eleven I went through the door.
I lost no time in making sure that each of the blind mice was a free
man, but I insisted that they act as though bound till the proper time.
They were trembling, but it was not from fear, not that time.

Back in my hiding-place I waited, and soon I heard the singing voice.
Ten minutes later the Donna Marchesi had her lantern hung on the nail.
Ah! She was more beautiful that night than I had ever seen her. Dressed
in filmy white, her beautiful body, lovely hair, long lithe limbs would
have bound any man to her through eternity. She seemed to sense that
beauty, for, after giving out the first supply of rolls, she varied her
program. She told her audience how she had dressed that evening for
their special pleasure. She described her jewels and her costume. She
almost became grandiose as she told of her beauty, and, driving in the
dagger, she twisted it as she reminded them that never would they be
able to see her, never touch her or kiss her hand. All they could do was
to hear her sing, applaud and at last die.

Of all the terrible things in her life that little talk to those blind
men was the climax.

And then she sang. I watched her closely, and I saw what I suspected.
She sang with her eyes closed. Was she in fancy seeming that she was in
an opera-house before thousands of spellbound admirers? Who knows? But
ever as she sang that night her eyes were closed, and even as she came
to a close, waiting for the usual applause, her eyes were closed.

       *       *       *       *       *

She waited in the silence for the clap of hands. It did not come. With
terrific anger, she whirled to her basket and reached for her whip.

"Dogs!" she cried. "Have you so soon forgot your lesson?"

And then she realized that the twenty blind men were closing in on her.
They were silent, but their outstretched hands were feeling for
something that they wanted very much. Even when her whip started to cut,
they were silent. Then one man touched her. To her credit, there was no
sign of fear. She knew what had happened. She must have known, but she
was not afraid. Her single scream was nothing but the battle-cry of the
tiger cat going into action.

There was a single cry, and that was all. The men reached for what they
wanted in silence. For a while they were all in a struggling group on
their feet, but soon they were all on the ground. It was simply a mass,
and under that mass was a biting, scratching, fighting, dying animal.

I couldn't stand it. I had planned it all, I wanted it all to happen,
but when it came, I just couldn't stand it. Covered with the sweat of
fear, I ran to the door and unlocked it. I swung it open, went through
the doorway, closed it and locked it again. The men, waiting for me in
the cellar, looked on with doubt. It seemed that they were right in
thinking that my tale was an alcoholic one.

"Give me whisky!" I gasped, as I dropped on the floor.

In a few minutes I had recovered.

"Open the door," I ordered. "And bring the blind men out."

One at a time they were brought to the kitchen, and identified. Some
were terribly mutilated in the face, long deep scratches, and even
pieces bitten out, and one had the corner of his mouth torn. Most of
them were sobbing hysterically, but, in some way, though none said so, I
judged that they were all happy.

We went back to the cellar and through the door. On the stone floor was
a clotted mass of red and white.

"What's that?" asked the American consul.

"I think that is the Donna Marchesi," I replied. "She must have met with
an accident."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tiger Cat, by David H. Keller

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIGER CAT ***

***** This file should be named 32630-8.txt or 32630-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/3/32630/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
