The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Long Arm, by Franz Habl

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Long Arm

Author: Franz Habl

Release Date: May 30, 2010 [EBook #32610]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONG ARM ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            The Long Arm

                          By FRANZ HABL[1]

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from Weird Tales October
1937. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Creeping, writhing, insidiously crawling and groping, the
long arm reached out in its ghastly errand of death_]

PREFACE
I had been out of Germany for thirty-five years, drawn hither and
thither by various glittering of will-of-the-wisps. When I returned to
my native country, I was as poor in pocket as when I left, and much
poorer in illusions.

The Berlin insurance company which I had represented with such mediocre
success in Switzerland, Austria and Belgium agreed to let me sell for
them at home, and by a curious coincidence there was an opening in the
quaint old Bavarian city in which I had been born and bred.

I will pass over the strangely mingled feelings with which I rode in a
Twentieth Century railroad train past the thousand-year-old walls of one
of the most curious ancient cities in Europe, a town moreover whose
every winding narrow street and sharp-gabled building had been the
companion of my infancy and childhood. No one seemed to know me, and I
recognized no one. For several days I made no attempt to sell life
insurance, but wandered in a dream, the bewildered ghost of my former
self, about the spots which I had known in happier days.

One dull rainy afternoon I took refuge from the weather in a dingy
little coffee-house in which, at the age of fourteen or fifteen, I along
with certain boon companions, had learned the gentle art of billiards.
It seemed as if every article of furniture was just as I had walked away
from them, well toward half a century before. It was raining outside,
and I sat alone in the gloomy, smoky old place, pondering the sweet and
bitter mysteries of life.

While I sat thus, staring out with unseeing eyes at the rain which was
by this time beating down smartly on the pavement, I became conscious
that someone in the room was staring at me. I had not noticed that there
was anyone else in the dark, low-ceilinged place except the obsequious
proprietor who had served me my cigar and coffee. Now I realized that a
man who sat in the corner diagonally across from me was studying me
curiously from over his newspaper. His face was one that I had seen
before. Suddenly, across all the years, I remembered him. And in that
same moment he rose and came toward me with his hand held out.

We had been in school together, in the Gymnasium. He had been a strange
fellow with few friends, but had enjoyed the reputation of being the
best student in his class. But in his last year in the Gymnasium he had,
for what reason I never knew, excited the animosity of a cantankerous
old professor who had publicly declared that Gustav was not the kind of
boy who should have a Gymnasium diploma and that he, the professor, was
determined never to give him a passing grade. My father had admired the
boy very much, and at one juncture when my marks looked perilously low,
he had employed Gustav to tutor me. Gustav had been so successful that
Father was delighted and made him a present of a silver cigarette case
with Gustav's initials and mine engraved on it. I remembered all this
very distinctly as we shook hands, but I was doing fast thinking,
because for the life of me I couldn't remember his strange last name. I
had a feeling that it was a very foreign name, Polish or Croatian or
something of the sort. As he mentioned this and that, I fear I answered
him a little absently and incoherently. The name was almost there. The
syllables flitted tantalizingly just out of my reach. But I was sure the
name began with a B. Wasn't it a Bam- or a Ban-something? Ah! I had it.
Banaotovich!

From that moment the conversation went more easily. I was surprized and
pleased when Banaotovich drew his silver cigarette-case out of his
pocket to prove to me how highly he thought of my poor deceased father.
We were soon launched on a cordial exchange of childhood memories.
Banaotovich seemed a good-hearted fellow after all, and I wondered why
in my childhood I had never been quite comfortable in his company. I
remembered that other boys of the group had admitted to me
confidentially that they were more than a little afraid of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The longer we talked the more intimate, the more in the nature of a
mutual confession, our conversation became. I admitted to Banaotovich
that the hifalutin fashion in which I had left the town to win fame and
fortune years before, had been asinine in the extreme, and that it
served me just right to have to sneak back unknown and penniless.
Banaotovich rejoined that for all his pride in his school marks he had
remained a person of no importance, and that the pot had not the
slightest intention of making itself ridiculous by calling the kettle
black. He seemed almost painfully inclined to run himself down. I could
feel in his manner a sort of pathetic reaching out for sympathy and
consideration. And it began to seem as if he were about to tell me
something or ask me for something. But whatever he had to tell seemed
hard to say, and it was slow in coming over his lips.

Banaotovich ordered two bottles of the heavy native wine. I drank
sparingly of it, because it goes to my head. But Banaotovich swallowed
two or three glassfuls in hasty succession, and his cheeks grew flushed.
There was a pause. Suddenly he leaned across the table toward me and
spoke in a hoarse, excited whisper.

"Modersohn," he said anxiously, "I want to make a confession to you--a
terrible confession. It may turn you against me completely. Maybe you
don't want to hear it. If you don't, say so, and I'll go home. But it
seems as if I've got to tell somebody about it. It seems as if I've got
to find somebody who understands me and can excuse me, or it will kill
me. Shall I tell you? Shall I?"

I was startled. I was reasonably sure that Banaotovich was no criminal,
since he had lived half a century in his native city, undisturbed and
from all he had told me solvent and respected. I had always known that
he was a queer fish, a brooding, solitary sort of person, and I settled
myself to listen to some harmless bit of psychopathy which meant nothing
except to the unfortunate subject.

"My dear fellow," I said, no doubt a little patronizingly, "I am sure
you haven't anything to confess that will make you out an outrageous
rascal, but if it will do you any good to tell me your troubles, I am
ready to listen to them."

"Thank you," said Banaotovich in a trembling voice. "I've done nothing
that they can put me behind the bars for. But I--I----"

He stared at me sternly.

"But I've done worse things," he said solemnly, "than some poor fellows
that have been strung up by the neck and choked to death!"

I laughed, a little nervously. "Tell me your story, if you like," I
said, "and let me decide just how black you are. But I haven't a great
deal of apprehension. We're all of us poor miserable sinners, as far as
that's concerned. I could tell you things about myself----"

Banaotovich was not listening to me at all. He had fallen suddenly into
a fit of black brooding. After a minute or two, he looked up and asked
sharply:

"Do you remember Wolansky?"

Wolansky was the Greek professor who had threatened to vote against
Banaotovich when he was finishing his course at the Gymnasium.

"Of course," said I. "And I remember well how he abused you that last
year. If there ever was a cantankerous old scoundrel, Wolansky was just
that identical individual!"

"Maybe," he said absently; then after another pause:

"Do you remember that Wolansky died suddenly, just a little while before
the end of the school year?"

I nodded. "I imagine that was a great piece of good luck for you," I
said.

"Yes," said Banaotovich. "If he had lived, I should never have had my
diploma. As it was, I finished with honors. If Wolansky hadn't died when
he did, I'd have been ruined. Don't forget that--ruined!"

I was puzzled at his insistence. "Yes, you would have been seriously
handicapped," I agreed. "Ruined is the word, perhaps."

Banaotovich's face was purple with wine and some strange kind of
suffering. "Do you remember another thing?" he said thickly. "Do you
remember an old Hindoo who had a dark little hole away back of the shops
and the beer depot and the livery stables between the Old Market and the
river?"

"The old fellow that had love charms and told fortunes and helped people
to health and wealth and happiness?" I said in a tone of slightly forced
cheerfulness. It was hard to be cheerful with those somber eyes boring
into you. "Yes, I remember him, all right. I wanted to go and see him
once, when I was about fifteen or sixteen, but Father told me that
meddling with the black art had sent more people to hell than it had
helped. And Father was so terribly earnest about it that he frightened
me. I never went. As a matter of fact it was only a passing fancy, and I
soon forgot all about him."

"That Hindoo," said my old school-fellow thoughtfully, "knew things
about the secret forces in the universe that made him almost a god. And
he taught me things that the wisest philosopher in the world doesn't
suspect. Still, your father may have been right. I think it very likely
that what he taught me may send me to hell!"

I shivered. I looked up nervously to make sure that the way was clear to
the door. I began to suspect that my friend Banaotovich, though he was
certainly not a criminal, might be a dangerous lunatic.

My _vis-à-vis_ rubbed absently at a protuberance on his left side. I had
noticed it when he first came across the room to speak to me. A
deformity--I was sure it had not been there when he was a boy--or
perhaps a tumor or some such thing as that.

"I kept very quiet about what the Hindoo taught me, because I knew most
people felt about such things much as you say your father did. And I
wanted to get on in the world. But I had an idea the Hindoo could help
me get on. Perhaps he _has_----"

And he stared gloomily at space.

"Perhaps he has. And perhaps he hasn't."

He brooded. Then he took up the thread of his story.

"Wolansky nearly drove me to suicide. I read and studied and crammed,
day and night. I tried everything I could think of to overcome the man's
antagonism. I crawled in the dust before him like a whipped cur! Nothing
did any good. And when I saw he hated me and was determined to smash me,
I began to hate _him_, too. I came to hate him worse than I hated the
devils in hell. There was a time when I had to hold myself back with all
my strength to keep from sticking a knife into him or braining him with
a chair. But the Hindoo and I made some experiments with telepathy, and
I discovered that there are other ways of killing a man besides stabbing
him or giving him poison.

"I learned how to make a man in front of me on the street turn around
and look at me. I learned how to make _you_ dream about me and come and
tell me the dream the next morning," (when he said that, I jumped, for I
remembered having done exactly that thing!). "I learned how to bring out
a bruise on Wolansky's face although he lived on the other side of town;
so that he went around asking people how he could have bumped his
forehead without knowing it. And at last I went to bed one night, set my
mind on Wolansky, and said over and over to myself a thousand times:
Die, you dog! You've _got_ to die! I _order_ you to die!

"I said it over till I fell into a sort of trance. It wasn't sleep, I
tell you. You can't sleep when you are in a state like that. And in my
trance, I could feel another arm grow out of my side here and grow
longer and longer, and grow out through the window although the window
was closed, and grow out across the street and down the street and right
through the walls and across the river.

"I had never known where Wolansky lived. But that night I knew. I had
never known the street or the house number. I had never been there in my
life. But I can tell you just exactly how his bedroom looked. The
wash-stand between the two windows, the work-table against the west
wall, the wardrobe, the old divan against the north wall. In a corner
the blue-gray tiled stove with some of the tile chipped off. And against
the south wall--the bed he lay in. I can tell you the color of the
blanket he pulled up over his face. It was a dirty brownish red.

"But my hand seemed to go through the blanket and grip Wolansky by the
throat. First he sighed and turned his head to one side and tried to
wriggle free. Then he raised his arms and tried to get hold of something
that wasn't there. His sighs turned into groans, and the groans changed
to a death rattle. He threw his arms and legs wildly around in the air,
his body bent up like a bow. But my hand held his head down against the
pillow. At last he quit struggling and dropped down limp on the bed.
Then the arm came crawling back in to my body, and I came out of the
trance--and went to sleep--or perhaps I fainted.

"The next morning the director came into our classroom and told us
Wolansky had died in the night of some sort of attack. You remember
that, I am sure----"

When Banaotovich began to tell me this story, he had looked away from
me, and his eyes never met mine during the telling. He had begun with a
painful effort, but as he went on he grew more and more excited and more
and more inflamed with hatred of the malicious old Greek teacher, till
it almost seemed as if he had forgotten me and was living the astounding
experience through for himself alone. When he was through, his ecstasy
of indignation left him and he sat dejected and apprehensive, studying
me pitifully out of the corners of his deep gray eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he stopped speaking, there was a moment of silence. Then I said
something. I think what I said was, "Very extraordinary!"

He smiled, a strained, sarcastic smile. "Extraordinary?" he repeated,
with an interrogation point in his voice.

"Your nerves were strained to the breaking-point," I said. "Your trouble
with the old rascal had driven you half distracted. Then there was all
that occultistic hodgepodge with the old Hindoo. And you were overworked
and run down, anyway. No wonder you dreamed dreams and saw visions. And
it may have been that there was some telepathic contact between you and
Wolansky, and when he had his apoplectic attack----"

The sarcastic smile deepened on Banaotovich's face. "So you have it all
explained, and I'm acquitted?" he inquired.

"Acquitted?" I cried. "You were never even accused. If the state were to
bring action against every man who had a feeling that he would be
happier if someone else were out of the way, the state would have a big
job on its hands!"

"Very true," Banaotovich assented icily. "I see I haven't got very far
with you yet. You are forcing me to continue my not very edifying
autobiography.--Did you know my father?"

I remembered his father, and I remembered that he had not enjoyed the
best possible reputation.

"I think I knew him," I said hesitantly. "He was a--a money-lender,
wasn't he?"

"Don't spare my feelings," said Banaotovich bitterly. "He was a usurer,
and a cruel one. I had a feeling for years that his business was a
disgrace to the family, and I made no bones about telling him so. There
were ugly scenes. I thought several times of leaving home. Finally,
Father told me one day that since I didn't approve of the way he got his
money, he was doing me the favor of disinheriting me. I told him that
was all right with me, that I'd rather starve than live on money that
was stained with the blood of poor debtors.

"I thought at the time that I meant it. But about that time I had become
interested in a young woman. I had never had much to do with the girls,
and very few of them seemed at all interested in me. But this one
appeared to like me, and when I made advances to her, she didn't repel
me. I am no connoisseur of female beauty, but I think she was unusually
attractive, and at that time I was half mad about her. Still waters run
deep, you know.

"Well, she had me under her spell so completely that I changed my mind
about Father's money. I began to truckle to him, much as I had truckled
to Wolansky. I began to feel him out to find whether he had made a will.
He was very cold and non-committal. Finally I asked him outright if he
would reconsider his decision to leave me penniless. He told me it was I
that had made the decision, not he, and that he had no use for
wishy-washy people that changed their minds like weather-cocks. He was
very sarcastic. I lost my temper and answered him back. We had a
terrible quarrel, and finally he--he struck me. I was twenty years old
and a bigger man than he. And I think no man ever had more stubborn
pride, at bottom, than I have.

"It was the Wolansky thing all over again. The humiliation, the effort
at ingratiation, the failure, the long, eating, gnawing, growing hatred.
And it--it ended the same way. The night of brooding that hardened into
a devilish decision, the vision of the long arm, growing, stretching,
crawling--but not so far this time, only through two walls and across
our own house. You remember that Father died of an apoplectic stroke,
just as Wolansky had done a year or two before."

"Yes, I think I remember," I said in considerable embarrassment. The
thing _did_ begin to look uncanny. I was thoroughly sorry for the poor,
cracked fellow, but I would just as soon not have been alone with him in
that solitary drinking-place in the twilight.

"Well?" he said, almost sharply.

"Well, Banaotovich," I answered with a show of confidence, "you have had
a great deal of unhappiness, and you have my sympathy. This strange
faculty you have of anticipating deaths, like the night-owls and the
death-watch that ticks in the walls, has made these bereavements an
occasion of self-torment for you. I think you should see a
psychiatrist."

"Anticipating--anticipating?" Banaotovich had gone back and was
repeating a word I had used, and as he repeated it he drummed madly on
the table with his fingers. "It's a curious coincidence that
'anticipating' is just the word my wife used when I told her about it."

"You--told--your wife--what you have just told me?" I stammered. "Do you
think that was wise?"

"I couldn't help it," he said with a catch in his throat. "I thought I
loved her, and I had to talk to somebody. I was miserable, and I had a
feeling that she might understand and be brought closer to me by
sympathy. Now that I think of it, I can see that I was an egregious
idiot, but I discovered long ago that we aren't rational beings after
all. We are driven or drawn by mysterious forces, and we go to our
destination because we can't help it.

"My wife had always seemed a little timid with me. I never seemed to
have the gift of attracting people. And I don't know whether she would
ever have been interested in me at all if I hadn't used a little--a
little charm the Hindoo taught me. Perhaps that didn't have much to do
with it--but I had never been happy with her. However that may be, one
evening when she seemed unusually approachable, I had just the same
impulse that I had when I met you here tonight, and I told her about
Wolansky and Father. She pooh-poohed it all just as you did. But she was
afraid. I could see that. She was more and more afraid of me as the days
went by. For a long time she tried to be cordial and natural in my
presence, but it was a sham and the poor thing couldn't keep it up. Each
of us knew as well what was in the mind of the other as if we had talked
the situation over frankly for hours. We reached the point where we
couldn't look each other in the face. No solitude could have been as
ghastly as that solitude of two people who shared a revolting secret.
For I had convinced her that I was guilty. I had succeeded in doing what
I had set out to do, and I had ruined two lives in doing it. I have the
faculty, it seems, of poisoning whatever I touch. Only today, my wife
said to me----"

I started to my feet with a great rush of relief and thankfulness. "Ah,
your wife is alive, then?" I cried.

"My wife is alive. That is--my _second_ wife is alive," he said, with a
horrible forced smile.

I sank back gasping. "What did you do with your first wife, you dirty
hound?" I moaned in helpless indignation.

       *       *       *       *       *

He closed his eyes, and a wave of bitter triumph played about the
muscles of his mouth. "Have I convinced _you_ too, at last?" he said.

Then I realized that I had been an insulting idiot. At worst, the man
before me was a pathological case, and he certainly belonged in an
asylum rather than in a prison.

"Forgive me, Banaotovich," I panted. "I don't know what made me----"

He looked at me sadly, almost compassionately. "There is nothing to
forgive," he said, very quietly. "I am all you called me and a thousand
times worse. Now let me finish my story."

"You don't need to," I said hastily. "I know all the rest of it."

All interest, I am afraid nearly all sympathy, had gone out of me. What
I wanted most of all was to get away from this melancholy citizen with
power and madness in his gray eyes.

"No, you don't know quite all of it yet," he insisted. "Perhaps if I
tell you the whole story, even if you can't excuse me--and I don't
deserve your excusing, I don't _want_ your excusing--you can understand
me a little better, and think of me a little more kindly.

"There was another woman. I couldn't help it, any more than any of us
can help anything. A fine, sympathetic young woman, who loved me because
she knew I was unhappy. I had been married to the other woman for four
years. We were completely estranged. We could scarcely bear to speak to
each other. I couldn't be easy one moment in the same house with her. I
had a cot in my office out in town because I couldn't even sleep soundly
at home. It was hell. The terror in her eyes made me physically sick. My
wife learned about the other woman. My wife was a devout Catholic, and
there was no possibility of a divorce. I could read in my wife's face
just what went on in her mind. She knew the other woman had become my
only reason for living. And one day I read in her eyes, along with the
terror, a glint of desperate determination. She knew she was in danger,
she knew I had a power that I could exercise when I chose in spite of
all the courts and police and jails in the country. She knew her life
was in danger, and her eyes told me that mine was in danger for that
very reason. I didn't blame her. Half my grief through all the years had
been grief for _her_. But the instinct of self-defense in me was
strong--and--she went--too--like----"

[Illustration: "And she went, too, like the other."]

He never finished his sentence. He dropped his head on the table and
began to sob hysterically. I laid a gingerly hand on his shoulder.

"Banaotovich," I said unsteadily, "I'm sorry for you----"

He sat up and supported his chin in both hands. "I haven't been as--as
bad as all this sounds like," he said after a while. "Before I was
married a second time, I went to the chief of police and gave myself up.
The chief listened to my story--I didn't try to explain it all, as I've
done with you, but just blurted out the main facts; but the longer he
listened the uneasier he became, and when I got through he asked me
nervously if I didn't think I ought to go into a sanitarium for a while.
Then he bowed me out in a big hurry. Perhaps if I had told him all the
ins and outs of it, it might have been different----"

"But don't you think he's right about the sanitarium?"

"Right? I'm as sane as you are. I've killed three people, a crazy
scoundrel, a hard man, and a pure, innocent woman. But I did it all
because I had to. A sanitarium wouldn't do me or anyone else any good,
and it would be a heavy expense. I have taken the responsibility for
another pure, innocent woman, and I must support her. The war and the
depression swept away my father's fortune, and my present business has
dwindled away till I am making only the barest living. I have applied
for the agency for a big Berlin insurance company, and if I can get it,
along with my other business, I shall be fairly comfortable. But I
understand there is some talk of their sending in a representative from
outside. If they do that, if they take the bread out of my mouth like
that, it won't be good for the outsider!"

He was drunk, and his drunkenness was working him into an ugly mood. He
was dangerous, and physical courage was never my strong point.

"What is the name of the Berlin company?" I asked timidly.

He named the firm I myself worked for. Then he fumbled for his bottle,
and with stern and painful attention set about the difficult and
delicate task of filling his glass again. I muttered something about
being back in a moment, and made for the door. He was too busy to pay
any attention to me.

When I had the door safely shut behind me, I sprinted through the rain
to my hotel as if the devil himself were after me....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a long time before I got over waking up in the middle of the
night with the feeling that an icy, iron-muscled hand was clutching at
my throat. I don't have the experience often any more, but I have never
seen the city of my birth since that awful night. I got out on the
midnight train, and my company obligingly gave me territory on the other
side of Germany.

Some time ago I happened to see a notice in the paper to the effect that
a certain patient named G. Banaotovich had died suddenly in the
Staatliche Nervenheilanstalt in Nuremberg. But I have met the name
rather frequently of late, and I think it is a fairly common one. I
didn't investigate.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Footnote 1: Adapted by Roy Temple House from the German.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Long Arm, by Franz Habl

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LONG ARM ***

***** This file should be named 32610-8.txt or 32610-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/1/32610/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
